HORMEN ES

Discover the Breakthrough Treatment Program
for Better Hormonal Health

Natural Treatment Programs for:
Weight Loss = PMS + Menopause + Fatigue - Irritability

KRISTY VERMEULEN, ND

FOREWORD BY DIRK VAN LITH, MD

KRISTY VERMEULEN, ND

$1 hathereigh

Hatherleigh Press is committed to preserving and protecting the natural resources of
the earth. Environmentally responsible and sustainable practices are embraced within
the company’s mission statement.

Visit us at www hatherleighpress.com and register online for free offers, discounts,
special events, and more.

Happy Hormones
Text Copyright © 2014 Kristy Vermeulen

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available.
ISBN: 975-1.57626.486-5
eBook ISBN: 978-1.57826-487-2

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic or otherwise, without written
permission from the publisher.

DISCLAIMER
“This book does not give legal or medical advice. The information and recommendations
outlined in this book are not a substitute for personal consultations with a physician. All
matters regarding your health require medical supervision. This publication contains the
opinions and ideas of the author. I is intended to provide helpful and informative material
on the subjects addressed in the publication. The information in this book should not be
used to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease. I is intended to provide you with
helpful information that you can discuss with your health-care provider. This book is sold
with the understanding that the author and publisher are not engaged in rendering
medical, health, psychological, or any kind of professional services in the book. If the
reader requires personal, medical, or other assistance or advice, a competent professional
should be consulted.

‘The author and publisher specifically disclaim al responsibiliy for any liability, loss, or
risk, personal or otherwise, that is incurred as a consequence, directly or indirectly, of the
use and applications of the contents of this book.

It is the concern of the US Department of Health and Human Services that no
homeopathic or nutritional supplements be used to replace established, conventional
medical approaches, especially in cases of emergencies, serious or life-threatening
conditions, or disease. Replacing conventional medical treatment with such remedies,
especially in serious cases, may deprive the patient of necessary treatment, potentially
causing harm and posing a legal liability threat to the health professional involved. The
nutritional supplements, homeopathics, herbs, and dietary recommendations in this book
should not be used to replace conventional medical treatments.

‘The names and details of individuals mentioned in the book have been changed in order
to protect the privacy of those involved.

Cover Design by Chis Sheesley
Interior & Back Cover Design by Carolyn Kasper

hatherleigh
[ESTE—

a1

Dedication

To the millions of women suffering from hormonal imbalances who
have been told there is nothing wrong and that their symptoms are
normal.

To all the health-care practitioners who are reading this book
because they want to better understand how they can help their
patients balance their hormones.

And to my family and my amazing husband Jasper for your
unconditional love and support.

—Kristy Vermeulen,
ND

Contents

Cover
Title Page
Copyright

Dedication
Foreword
Introduction
PART 1
HAPPY HORMONES EXPLAINED
Chapter 1 Dr. Kristy’s Happy Hormones Program

Chapter 2 What Are Hormones and Why Are They
Important?

PART 2
HORMONE DIAGNOSIS: QUESTIONNAIRE,
SYMPTOMS, AND LAB TESTING

Chapter 3 Happy Hormones Questionnaire
Chapter 4 Symptoms of Hormonal Imbalances
Chapter 5 Recommended Laboratory Testing

PART 3

HAPPY HORMONES TREATMENT PROGRAM

Chapter 6
Chapter 7

Chapter 8

Chapter 9

Chapter 10

Chapter 11

Chapter 12
Chapter 13

Chapter 14

Nutrition for Happy Hormones

Natural Solutions for Estrogen Excess: PMS,
Irritability, and Weight Gain

Natural Solutions for Estrogen Deficiency:
Hot Flashes, Insomnia, and Dryness
Natural Solutions for Progesterone
Deficiency: Infertility, Irritability, PMS, and
Insomnia

Natural Solutions for Cortisol Excess: Stress,
Anxiety, and Irritability

Natural Solutions for Cortisol Deficiency:
Fatigue, Brain Fog, and Feeling
Overwhelmed

Natural Solutions for Low Thyroid: Fatigue,
Weight Gain, Low Mood, and Headaches
Natural Solutions for DHEA Deficiency: Poor
Concentration, Abdominal Fat, and Low
Libido

Natural Solutions for Testosterone
Deficiency: Low Libido, Fatigue, and
Increased Body Fat

PART 4
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Chapter 15 Getting Started with Happy Hormones

PART 5
APPENDIX
Appendix A: Hormone Replacement Therapy

Appendix B: Specialty Labs for Hormone Self-Testing
Appendix C: Homeopathic Remedies for Happy

Hormones
PART 6
HAPPY HORMONES RECIPE COLLECTION
Breakfast
Soups
Salads

Vegetarian Main Courses

Meat, Poultry, and Fish Main Courses
Sides

Snacks

References

Foreword

1LLIONS OF women suffer from hormonal imbalances, such as

lty losing weight, fatigue, irritability, and brain fog, yet these
imbalances are often overlooked and untreated. Dr. Kristy
Vermeulen’s Happy Hormones offers a revolutionary breakthrough in
understanding the most common hormonal imbalances, along with
how best to support the women who are dealing with these
imbalances.

Dr. Kristy uses a fascinating approach, combining both allopathic
and integrative medicine in her Happy Hormones diagnosis and
treatment programs. By bringing together her clinical experience,
naturopathic medical training, and the latest research, she was able
to provide a comprehensive guide to help women effectively assess
and treat the most common hormonal imbalances. As I read through
this book, 1 am continually impressed with Dr. Kristy's ability to
clarify and simplify the complex world of hormones.

The book begins with Dr. Kristy explaining what exactly
hormones are, and why they are so important to our health and
well-being. She continues on to describe, simply and clearly, the
most frequently seen hormonal ~imbalances—cortisol, thyroid,
estrogen, progesterone, testosterone, and DHEA excesses and
deficiencies are all expertly discussed, along with how these
imbalances affect us. Using a comprehensive questionnaire,
accompanied by symptom tables and suggested laboratory tests, Dr.
Kristy further outlines how to identify these six common sources of
hormonal imbalances. By understanding which hormonal
imbalances are directly affecting your health, you can immediately

begin to make the changes necessary to balance your levels and
reclaim your energy, mood, and overall health.

For me, the highlight of the book are the Happy Hormones
treatment programs. In these chapters, Dr. Kristy takes the time to
go into greater detail regarding each of the potential hormonal
excesses and deficiencies, providing nutritional and lifestyle
guidance, along with specific herbal, vitamin, and bioidentical
hormone recommendations for each imbalance. 1 found the
treatment recommendations for adrenal fatigue and low thyroid
function particularly interesting.

Over the years, I have seen Dr. Kristy’s success in treating these
imbalances in the faces of numerous grateful patients, one of whom
was my own wife, whom she treated for adrenal fatigue. I have even
incorporated some of Dr. Kristy’s treatment suggestions for adrenal
and thyroid imbalances into my own practice, with great success. It
has been amazing to see the progress my patients make after
addressing their hormonal imbalances: they lose weight more easily,
their mood and energy levels improve, and they even sleep better.

By reading this book, practitioners and patients alike will learn
how to connect the dots; determining the connections between
vague symptoms such as fatigue, irritability, brain fog, difficulty
losing weight, and menopause, and allowing them to make educated
decisions for resolving particular hormonal imbalances. When these
connections have been established, and any imbalances properly
addressed, many women’s lives will be changed for the better.

Happy Hormones offers newfound health to those who have been
suffering with hormonal problems for much too long. It is a must-
read for all women, especially if they are feeling fatigued, heavy,
irritable, or menopausal.

— Dr. DIRK VAN Lita,
MD, MPH, DTM&H,
author of The
Original European
HCG Cure

Introduction

Q PTIMAL HORMONE balance is necessary to live a life full of energy,
th, and happiness. As a female naturopathic doctor who has
been through her own hormonal imbalances, I have always searched
for natural, safe solutions for balancing hormones. For years I
suffered from high cortisol, then low cortisol, followed by estrogen
excess and progesterone deficiency. Through these imbalances 1
experienced symptoms ranging from anxiety, PMS, eczema,
menstrual cramps, low libido, and fatigue. But with the combination
of research and years of experience, I created a treatment program
that allowed me to break through those hormonal imbalances and
regain my energy, concentration, and sex drive and say good-bye to
the emotional roller-coaster that is PMS. I am so thankful that I
discovered these solutions and I can’t wait for you to discover them
as well.

I have written this book for all the women out there suffering
from hormonal imbalances, whether it is low energy, irritability,
PMS, menstrual cramps, hot flashes, insomnia, low sex drive, weight
gain, or infertility. Pm sure that, like many of my patients, you have
most likely been to your doctor expressing some of these symptoms
and been told it's nothing and that these symptoms are normal. But
this is not true. Though these symptoms may be common, they are
not normal. By acknowledging these symptoms and working to
balance their hormones, I help women regain their vitality, energy,
and health so they can live the healthy, fabulous life they deserve. It
is my goal with this book to get you there as well.


Happy Hormones is a step-by-step guide to get your hormones
back on track. It is designed to give you all the necessary
information you need so you can assess your specific hormonal
imbalance and successfully treat it through diet and lifestyle
recommendations, nutritional supplements, homeopathic and herbal
medicines, as well as bioidentical hormones. It is the same protocol
that I have used in my practice to help hundreds of women attain
optimal hormone balance, health, and happiness.

Happy Hormones
Explained

CHAPTER 1

Dr. Kristy’s Happy Hormones
Program

1L10Ns OF women are living with hormonal imbalances every
thout getting sufficient help. These imbalances can range
from PMS, infertility, weight gain, and the terrible hot flashes
experienced during menopause to fatigue, stress, anxiety, and poor
memory. For years women have been searching for answers to help
resolve these symptoms but they are often left feeling confused and
hopeless after being told there is nothing that can be done.
Fortunately there are many natural treatment options available to
help you break through these imbalances and get back to the
healthy, happy life you deserve. And it is this information I wish to
share with you through the Happy Hormones program.

The Happy Hormones program helps you discover what your
particular hormonal imbalances are so you can successfully treat
them with a safe, scientifically based program. I've designed the
program into four parts:

1. General information so you can better understand what
hormones are and why they are important to your health

2. Hormone diagnosis, including a comprehensive questionnaire,
symptom lists, and recommended lab testing to help you
determine your particular hormone imbalances

3. A six-step hormone-balancing program to correct the hormonal
imbalances and get you feeling healthy and fabulous again

4. A getting-started guide with a general nutrition program,
recipes, and bioidentical hormone information to help you
utilize the information in the best way possible

The Happy Hormones six-step balancing program is a
comprehensive process, involving:

- Lifestyle modifications
* Dietary and nutritional changes

Nutritional supplements

Herbal support
+ Homeopathic solutions

+ Bioidentical hormone replacement therapy

Lifestyle and diet are considered the foundations of health. Without
a solid, healthy foundation, many important bodily processes, such
as detoxification, hormone production and metabolism, cognitive
functioning, and energy production, are unable to properly function.
We need these processes functioning at optimal levels to allow for
successful results with the other steps in the Happy Hormones
program.

Nutritional supplements are also an important part of the six-step
treatment program. We require some very specific nutrients for
hormone production and function. Depending on your particular
hormonal imbalance, these can range from simple vitamins and
‘minerals to homeopathics and ancient Indian herbs.


Bioidentical hormones are also included in the Happy Hormones
treatment program. Some hormonal deficiencies, depending on the
severity, respond faster with hormone supplementation. Because
there is a lot of controversy around hormone replacement, I have
included a separate chapter explaining the differences between
synthetic and bioidentical hormones, as well as safe application and
dosing methods.

By following this program, you will discover what your hormonal
imbalances are and how to treat them in the most safe and effective
way possible. Happy Hormones will help you regain your energy,
vitality, and youth so you can live a healthy, fabulous life.

CHAPTER 2

What Are Hormones and Why
Are They Important?

‘Why Hormones Are Important

Hormones are involved in almost every single process in our body.
We need them to survive. Hormones manage our blood-sugar levels
and weight, and support our immune system to help us better cope
with stress and illness. Hormones give men “male” characteristics
and women “female” characteristics. In women, they regulate the
menstrual cycle, pregnancy, and birth, and in both men and women,
they increase muscle and bone mass, confidence, and strength.
Hormones also regulate our daily wake and sleep cycles and
‘maintain our moods, energy, focus, and emotions.

As you can see, hormones are essential to life, especially for a life
that is healthy and happy. Unfortunately, our bodies are not
functioning with optimal hormonal levels these days. The
environment we live in—with work stress, family stress, long hours,
environmental pollution, inadequate sleep, and poor diet—is
making it difficult for our bodies to produce optimal levels of these
important hormones. We are constantly struggling just to make


enough hormones to get us through the day. And if we are unable to
produce optimal levels, hormonal-related symptoms can start to
show up. These symptoms can range from anxiety and difficulty
sleeping to hot flashes, weight gain, and infertility. It is important to
address hormonal health and maintain optimal levels so you can
live the healthy, energetic life you deserve.

‘What Are Hormones?

Hormones are biological messengers that are released from our
body’s endocrine glands and travel through the blood to elicit a
specific response on another gland, organ, tissue, or cell in our
body. They have the ability to bind to many different organs and
cells, resulting in a different action at each binding site. For
example, estrogen binds with receptors located on the uterus,
breasts, brain, bladder, blood vessels, and bone, but will elicit a
different response in each one. It stimulates the growth of uterine
and breast tissue, keeps the bladder and urethra lining healthy,
promotes blood-vessel dilation, and prevents bone loss. So, you can
see that one hormone affects more than one organ in more than one
way.

In addition to their ability to act on many different tissues, many
hormones need to work together to elicit a specific action from a
target tissue. For example, five hormones are needed to stimulate
the release of your egg at ovulation: gonadotropin-releasing
hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, and luteinizing hormone, as
well as estrogen and progesterone. All these hormones work
together throughout the menstrual cyele to ensure ovulation. So, it's
important to remember that many different hormones work together
and influence each others production and action. And when there is
a hormonal imbalance, usually more than one hormone needs to be
addressed.


Endocrine Glands and Their Hormones

The diagram below shows the different endocrine glands (glands
that produce and release hormones).

The Endocrine System
Posigird Jres—
Pray gona

[VY Thyroid gland

Thymus

¢ $ Aseattods

(mail
Ovaries
een}

‘The pituitary gland, located in the brain and nicknamed the “master
gland,” controls the release of many different hormones. It secretes
stimulating hormones that travel in the blood to other glands,
promoting their release of hormones. Besides secreting these
stimulating hormones, the pituitary gland also secretes growth
hormone, prolactin, antidiuretic hormone, and oxytocin.

‘The pineal gland, like the pituitary gland, is found in the brain. It
releases melatonin, the hormone responsible for regulating our daily
circadian rhythm and sleep cycle.

‘The thyroid gland, found just behind the Adam's apple, governs
our metabolism, weight, and energy by releasing thyroxine (T4) and
triiodothyronine (T3).


‘The next set of important glands are the adrenal glands. These sit
on top of the kidneys and release our stress hormones, as well as
some sex hormones and a hormone to help us retain our water.
Cortisol, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), epinephrine, aldosterone,
and some pregnenolone are all secreted by the adrenal glands to
help our body cope with stress.

The pancreas is the gland that releases the hormone insulin to
regulate our blood-sugar levels. It is the dysregulation of pancreatic
hormones that plays a large role in insulin resistance and diabetes.

‘The sex organs (the testes and the ovaries) secrete the majority of
our sex hormones: testosterone, estrogen, and progesterone
respectively.

There are many different hormones, but I will cover only the
hormones most commonly associated with hormonal imbalances I
see in my practice: the thyroid hormones, cortisol, estrogens,
progesterone, DHEA, and testosterone.

Thyroid Hormones

The thyroid hormones are responsible for regulating our
metabolism, body temperature, and maintaining our weight and
energy. The pituitary gland releases thyroid stimulating hormone
(TSH) to stimulate the thyroid gland to secrete thyroxine (T4) and
triiodothyronine (T3). T3 is considered the active hormone, which
means it is the hormone that binds with other cells, tissues, and
organs to kick our metabolism into gear, regulate our body
temperature, and so on. Our bodies convert T4 into T3, not only in
the thyroid gland, but also in the liver and gastrointestinal tract. So,
if our liver and gastrointestinal tract are not functioning optimally
because of nutritional deficiencies, toxins, or certain drugs, we may
not be producing enough T3.

Low thyroid function (hypothyroidism) is one of the most
common undiagnosed hormone imbalances I see in my practice.
This is due in part to the inaccuracy of the so-called normal
laboratory reference range for TSH. The reference range for TSH is

currently set from 0.450-4.500 ulU/mL. This range is too wide, and
anyone with a TSH greater than 2 ulU/mL can be experiencing
hypothyroid symptoms. But when the majority of physicians see the
TSH within this normal range, there is no further investigation of
the thyroid gland. So, a large majority of people experiencing
thyroid symptoms are not being treated.

People with low thyroid function can experience difficulty losing
weight, headaches, low mood, fatigue, and lethargy, as well as
chronic muscle soreness. As many of my patients explain, they just
have no “oomph.”

Estrogens

Estrogens have over 400 functions in our body. Many people think
that estrogen is only a female hormone, but males also produce
estrogen, just in smaller amounts. Estrogens are responsible for the
female sex characteristics in women, such as breast development,
the widened pelvis, and the distribution of fat around the hips and
thighs. They also help regulate our blood pressure, promote arterial
elasticity, and govern the female menstrual cycle, as well as
maintain our energy, libido, mood, and memory. In addition,
estrogen blocks bone loss, which is why postmenopausal women
with decreased estrogen levels are at a higher risk of developing
osteoporosis.

Types of Estrogen

There are actually three different types of estrogen: estrone,
estradiol, and estriol. Estrone is the major source of estrogen after
menopause. Estrone and its metabolites have been correlated with
increased risk of breast and uterine cancer, so we don’t want excess
amounts of it. This is one of the problems with synthetic hormone
replacement. The most common synthetic estrogen is 60-percent
estrone, and since we already have enough of this during

menopause, it is risky to provide more. Estradiol is the strongest
estrogen and is at its highest levels in premenopausal women. It is
the one estrogen that strongly promotes bone formation and
prevents osteoporosis.

‘The third estrogen is estriol. Estriol is nicknamed “the protective
estrogen,” as it doesn’t appear to increase the growth of breast or
uterine tissue. It is the weakest of all three of the estrogens and is
found in high concentrations during pregnancy. Estriol and estradiol
are the estrogens that are usually replaced during bioidentical
hormone replacement therapy.

‘The female body starts producing higher levels of estrogen during
puberty. During this time our pituitary gland releases follicle:
stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH), which
then travel to the ovaries to stimulate the production and release of
estrogen. This is when the female menstrual cycle starts to take
form.

THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE EXPLAINED

The female reproductive cycle involves an interplay of
hormones that normally results in cyclical changes in the
ovaries and uterus. Each cycle takes approximately 28 days to
complete and involves the development and release of an egg
from the ovaries and the preparation of the uterus to receive
a fertilized egg. If fertilization doesn't occur, the endometrial
(uterine) lining is lost through menstruation (day 1).

Days
Follclar Phase Ovation Lote Phase

12345678900 R067 89002056278

Basal Body Temperature


Follicular Phase

The first phase of the menstrual cycle is the follicular phase,
beginning on the first day of menstrual bleeding. During this
phase your pituitary gland starts releasing follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH) to stimulate the growth of the follicles
contained in the ovaries. Each follicle contains an egg that is
released during ovulation. The follicular phase usually lasts
about 12 to 14 days and ends with an abrupt surge in
luteinizing hormone to stimulate the release of the egg from
the follicle.

Ovulatory Phase

Ovulation happens when the egg is released from the ovarian
follicle. The egg then travels down the fallopian tubes, where
it waits to be fertilized by the male sperm. This ovulatory
phase lasts anywhere from 16 to 36 hours, but the egg can
only be fertilized up to 12 hours after it has been released
from the ovarian follicle.

Luteal Phase

The luteal phase begins right after ovulation. It lasts about 14
days, ending with menstruation. In this phase the follicle that
released the egg forms a structure called the corpus luteum.
The corpus luteum produces progesterone to help the body
prepare for a possible pregnancy. Progesterone causes the
cervical mucus to thicken to prevent bacteria and additional
sperm from entering the uterus, while also increasing body
temperature and helping to stimulate the thickening of the
uterine lining along with estrogen.

If the egg is not fertilized, the corpus luteum degenerates,
resulting in declining progesterone levels. This decline,
accompanied by decreasing estrogen levels, signals the start

of the menstrual period (menses). Menses occurs as the
thickened uterine lining is slowly shed in order to prepare the

uterus for the next menstrual cycle and possible fertilization.

If the egg is fertilized, the cells around the growing embryo
produce human chorionic gonadotropin hormone, which will
maintain the corpus luteum so it can continue its production
of progesterone. Pregnancy tests are based on detecting
increased levels of human chorionic gonadotropin.

Progesterone

Progesterone, like estrogen, has effects all over the body. It is
responsible for maintaining pregnancy, protecting the heart and
bones, regulating the menstrual cycle, increasing our mood, and
decreasing anxiety, as well as promoting sleep. It also has potent
anticancer characteristics in the breast and uterine tissues and is
always prescribed along with estrogen replacement to block
estrogen’s proliferative action on these tissues. Progesterone plays a
large role in a woman's mood and tranquility before her menstrual
period and throughout pregnancy. It increases during the last half of
the menstrual cycle in preparation for the implantation of a
fertilized egg in the uterine wall and dramatically increases
throughout pregnancy. If progesterone fails to increase to optimal
levels during pregnancy, early miscarriages can result. Progesterone,
like estrogen, decreases throughout menopause.

A NOTE ABOUT MENOPAUSE

Menopause usually occurs during your early fifties. However,
some women can experience menopause as early as 35 years
of age.

Menopause occurs when various hormones decline as a
result of your ovaries starting to slow down. Estrogen and
progesterone are primarily responsible for managing your
menstrual cycle, so when those hormones decrease, your
menstrual cycle is no longer stimulated, which results in the
lessening of menstrual periods and eventually the complete
absence of menses. Because your ovaries decrease production
of estrogen and progesterone with menopause, it is up to
your adrenal glands to take over. They will now have to
produce extra estrogen and progesterone in addition to the
testosterone, DHEA, and cortisol they are already producing.
Because of this extra burden, the majority of hormones
produced by the adrenal glands also decline with menopause.
And it is this overall decline in hormones that results in the
typical menopausal symptoms.

Testosterone

Many people think that testosterone is only a male hormone, but
females also produce testosterone, just at lower concentrations:
about 1/10 of the amount produced by males. Testosterone is the
hormone that makes men “men” by promoting the male secondary
sex characteristics, such as facial and body hair, narrow pelvis, and
deepening of the voice, as well as increased muscle and bone
strength. In both men and women, testosterone is often considered
to be the sexy hormone as it is largely responsible for our sense of
well-being, stamina, libido, and sexual desire. But testosterone
doesn’t only act as a sex hormone; it also protects the heart and
blood vessels to reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease, maintains


bone and muscle mass, decreases fat stores and obesity, and
increases our sense of self-confidence.

In men testosterone is produced primarily by the testes, but in
women the majority is produced and released by the adrenal glands,
with a small amount being produced by the ovaries. In both men
and women, testosterone declines dramatically with age. It has been
shown that men between the ages of 50 and 70 have a lower
testosterone level than the lowest level seen in men between 20 and
40 years old. And these men with the lower testosterone pass away
sooner than men with higher testosterone levels.

DHEA

Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), like testosterone, is a building
hormone. It promotes energy, libido, and bone strength and helps
our body heal from injury. It also acts to increase our mood and
overall sense of well-being. In the past 10 years or so, it's been given
credit as the “anti-aging hormone,” because people who age well
appear to have higher levels of DHEA than those who do not.

Lower DHEA levels are associated with the risk of developing type
1 diabetes, cardiovascular disorders, and inflammatory conditions
such as arthritis, as well as some cancers. A special function of
DHEA comes from its ability to convert into estrogen and
testosterone when needed and to oppose the effects of excess
cortisol and stress.

DHEA is synthesized primarily in the adrenal glands, with a small
amount produced in the brain. By the age of 70, DHEA levels
decline as much as 90 percent, resulting in some of the symptoms
and conditions associated with aging.

Cortisol

Cortisol is considered our stress hormone. It is produced by the
adrenal glands and is responsible for the flight-or-fight response; we

see a bear, we get scared, and our cortisol (along with other stress
hormones) kicks in to prepare our body for the stress of either
fighting the bear or running from it. Some of these typical acute
stress responses include pupil dilation, increased blood-sugar levels,
the temporary shutdown of our digestive and immune systems, and
the rerouting of blood away from our internal organs toward our
brain and skeletal muscles.

Our bodies are programmed to release cortisol in times of stress.
‘The problem is that stress should be only temporary; for example,
we see the bear and we decide to run from it. After we get away
from the bear and feel safe again, the stress response dissipates and
our cortisol levels return to normal. However, stress is more chronic
these days. Stressful jobs, meeting deadlines, taking care of our
families, working long hours, and eating a nutrient-deficient diet all
stimulate the stress response. As a result, our adrenal glands are
forced to release cortisol at higher levels for a longer time than
normal. Over time our adrenal glands become tired, resulting in
burnout and symptoms of adrenal fatigue. So, it’s important to find
ways to monitor and cope effectively with our stress.

In addition to cortisol’s antistress actions, it also decreases
inflammation and allergies and improves concentration, energy and
mood.

Now that we have discussed what hormones are and what they do
for you, let's move on to diagnosing your specific hormonal
imbalances so you can pinpoint the best treatment program for your
needs.

Hormone Diagnosis:
Questionnaire, Symptoms, and
Lab Testing

CHAPTER 3

Happy Hormones
Questionnaire

I NEAcH of the following tables, rate the severity of your symptoms:

= none
mild
moderate
= severe

0
1
2
3

After you have rated the severity of your symptoms, total the score
at the bottom of each test and compare with the given assessment
scores.

If your results indicate a possible deficiency or probable
deficiency, please refer to Part 3 to learn more about your treatment
options for each hormone imbalance.

ESTROGEN DEFICIENCY
Score

Hot flashes and night sweats
Poor memory and forgetfulness


Dribbling of urine upon coughing or sneezing
Dry and irritated eyes

Thin facial wrinkles around eyes and lips
Low mood and/or depression

Decreased breast firmness

Low libido

Irregular menstrual cycles

Light menstrual flow

Painful intercourse due to vaginal dryness
Easily broken bones

Osteopenia or osteoporosis

Assessment:
12 or less = sufficient levels
Between 13 and 23 = possible deficiency
More than 23 = probable deficiency

Total

ESTROGEN EXCESS

Score,

Heavy menstrual bleeding
Weight gain around the hips and thighs
Uterine fibroids

Irritability and low mood

Painful menstrual cramps

Breast swelling and tenderness

Anxiety

Irritable and more emotional before menstrual period

Assessment:
8orless = balanced levels

Total


Between 9 and 16 = possible excess
More than 16 = probable excess

PROGESTERONE DEFICIENCY
Score,

Difficulty sleeping
Anxiety and nervousness

Easily irritated and agitated

Low mood and/or depression

Tender, swollen breasts before menstrual period
Irritable and more emotional before menstrual period
Heavy menstrual periods

Painful menstrual cramps

Abdominal bloating before menstrual period

Uterine fibroids and/or ovarian cysts

Infertility

History of miscarriages

Total

Assessment:

Postmenopausal women:
4orless = sufficient levels
Between 5 and 8 = possible deficiency
More than 8 = probable deficiency

Premenopausal women and women taking hormone replacement therapy:
12 or less = sufficient levels
Between 13 and 23 = possible deficiency
More than 23 = probable deficiency

TESTOSTERONE DEFICIENCY
Men and women: Score


Loss of muscle tone

Increased abdominal fat

Tiredness

Decreased libido

Hot flashes and/or night sweats

Lower self-esteem and lack of confidence

Men only:

Loss of breast (pectoral) muscle tone
Decreased endurance during exercise
Decreased sexual performance

Assessment:

Women:
6 or less = sufficient levels
Between 7 and 11 = possible deficiency
More than 12 = probable deficiency

Men:
9orless = sufficient levels
Between 10 and 20 = possible deficiency
More than 20 = probable deficiency

Total

DHEA (DEHYDROEPIANDROSTERONE) DEFICIENCY

Score

Loss of muscle tone
Increased abdominal fat

Decreased concentration
Lack of focus

Decreased tolerance to noise
Low libido

Loss of body hair (underarms and pubic hair)

Total


Assessment:
7 or less = sufficient levels
Between 8 and 14 = possible deficiency
More than 14 = probable deficiency

TESTOSTERONE AND DHEA EXCESS
Score

Increased facial hair
Menstrual cycle longer than 35 days
Absence of menstrual period

Greasy skin and hair

Acne

Blood-sugar dysregulation (high or low)
Infertility

Irritability and aggression

Polycystic ovarian syndrome

Total

Assessment:
9 or less = balanced levels
Between 10 and 18 = possible excess
More than 18 = probable excess

CORTISOL DEFICIENCY
Score]

Difficulty concentrating and inability to focus

Crying bouts for no particular reason

Increased irritability and agitation to things that were
never a bother in the past

Fatigue, worse in the afternoon

Difficulty coping with stress

Decreased tolerance to noise

Low blood pressure


Digestion complaints(gas, bloating, abdominal
cramps/pain)

Salt and sugar cravings

Increased frequency of colds and flu

Cravings for coffee and other stimulants

Environmental and/or food allergies

Eczema, psoriasis, hives, and other skin rashes

Fatigue during or after exercise

Assessment:
14 or less = sufficient levels

Between 15 and 26 = possible deficiency
More than 26 = probable deficiency

Total

CORTISOL EXCESS

Score

Stressed out

Difficulty sleeping

Abdominal weight gain

Wired feeling

Feeling of running on adrenaline
Easily irritated

Thinning skin or itchy, irritated skin
Increased frequency of colds and flu
High blood pressure

Irregular menstrual cycles
Unexplained infertility

Assessment:

Total

11 or more = elevated cortisol levels, indicating active stress


THYROID DEFICIENCY
Score]

Intolerance to cold

Cold hands and feet

Difficulty getting up in the morning

Constant fatigue

Recurrent headaches

Easy weight gain

Dry skin

Dry and brittle hair and nails

Constipation, not having regular daily bowel movements

Loss of outer one-third of eyebrows

Low mood or depression

Taking antidepressants that don't seem to make a
difference with mood

Family history of thyroid problems

Total

Assessment:
12 or less = sufficient levels
Between 13 and 23 = possible deficiency
More than 23 = probable deficiency

CHAPTER 4

Symptoms of Hormonal
Imbalances

HEN L00KING at hormonal imbalances, there is often more than
oMeVimbalance occurring at a time. Hormones all influence each
other, and because of this we often see a combination of imbalances.
The diagram on the following page shows the complexity of
hormone interaction. You can see that different hormones are
needed for the production of others, so if there is a deficiency or
excess in one hormone, there will most likely be an imbalance of the
other hormones down that same path. Because of this chain
reaction, it is necessary to look at more than just one hormone in
order to gain a thorough understanding of what is happening with
your overall balance. Without this big-picture perspective, you will
be unable to effectively assess and treat your hormonal imbalances.


Cholesterol

[)

Pregnenolone

—

progesterone 17.0H Pregnenolone
| +

on oHEA

17.0 Progesterone |

UN l

Dihydrotestosterone Estradiol 4b Estrone

40H Estrone 20H Estone

16.0H Estrone

|

esriol

Cortisol

Cortisol is the body's major defense against stress, both physical and
emotional. Physical stress can occur from injuries, infections,
excessive exercise, malnutrition, changes in body temperature,
inflammation, and more. Emotional stress arises from daily
pressures, loss of loved ones, emotional traumas, and other factors
affecting our mental state. Without cortisol we would be unable to
cope with these stressors. It is the one hormone we need to survive.

Cortisol Excess

Cortisol imbalance begins with stress. Our bodies produce and
secrete higher levels of cortisol in response to stress to help us cope
with whatever the stressor may be. However, this stress is designed
to be a short-term process, not for the days, months, and years that
chronic stress is today.

Symptoms of excess cortisol are often associated with the typical
stress symptoms: anxiety, irritability, sleep disturbance, and a wired
feeling. If the stress goes on long enough, you can experience loss of
muscle and bone mass as cortisol breaks down your proteins, along
with thinning skin and an increased susceptibility to illness because
cortisol suppresses the immune system.

SYMPTOMS OF HIGH CORTISOL
Anxiety [Thinning skin
Insomnia [Insulin resistance
stressed-out feeling [Irritability
Abdominal weight gain | High blood pressure
Loss of muscle and bone Increased frequency of colds and
mass flu

I often see high cortisol levels in clients with stressful jobs, as well
as in new moms and university and graduate-school students.

If this stress continues, our adrenal glands can have a hard time
keeping up. They may be unable to produce enough cortisol to meet
our daily demands, resulting in lower cortisol levels and eventually
adrenal fatigue.

Adrenal Fatigue Progression

Adrenal fatigue is essentially the collection of signs and symptoms
resulting from low cortisol levels. Your cortisol levels normally
increase with stress, and then decrease back to normal levels within
a period of a few hours. But with today’s chronic stress, our cortisol
levels remain higher than normal to cope with these stress demands
(called the resistance phase). If this stress continues for a long
period of time, our adrenal glands can begin to have a hard time
keeping up with the cortisol demands. Cortisol levels then begin to
decline, resulting in the typical adrenal fatigue symptoms (see
diagram below).


Normal Sten

‘The time frame within the different phases of adrenal fatigue varies
greatly between individuals. Some people manage their high cortisol
levels for their entire life, whereas other people progress quite
quickly from the resistance phase into adrenal fatigue. Sometimes
people can coast along in the resistance phase until an acute stress
oceurs, such as the loss of a loved one. This stress can push them
rapidly into adrenal fatigue. I often hear clients say, “since this
particular event, I haven't been the same,” or, “since this event, I've
had no energy, problems dealing with stress, and am constantly
sick.”

Cortisol Deficiency
Cortisol deficiency (also known as adrenal fatigue) is something I
am seeing more and more in my practice. I often see this in people
who lead busy lives and are under a lot of stress. For example,
university students, working mothers, people in high-stakes jobs,
and people with a history of abuse and family/relationship
difficulties or losses. Adrenal fatigue is one of the most common and
underdiagnosed hormone imbalances. The reason why cortisol
deficiency is not readily diagnosed is because it’s not looked for in

conventional medicine, and the blood tests focus on adrenal failure,
not fatigue.

SYMPTOMS OF LOW CORTISOL
Anxiety Difficulty concentrating
Inability to cope with stress Low blood pressure
Easily irritated Asthma
. Increased frequency of colds
Fatigue and flu
'Worsened —
i Eczema, psoriasis, and other
allergies(environmental and
skin rashes
food)
Salt and sugar cravings

One thing to note is the adrenal glands’ role after menopause.
These glands are the primary source of sex hormones after
menopause, so if they are tired and struggling to produce enough
cortisol for our daily needs, our estrogen, progesterone, DHEA, and
testosterone levels will decrease faster than they would with
healthy, functioning adrenal glands. This can result in the worsening
of menopause symptoms.

Testosterone

Many people think of testosterone as just a male hormone, but it's
also an important female hormone. Men have about 10 times the
amount of testosterone than women, and it’s these higher levels that
are responsible for the male secondary sex characteristics.
Testosterone is a building hormone, so it plays a large role in
maintaining our muscle and bone mass and provides us with an
overall sense of confidence, energy, and well-being.


Testosterone Deficiency
Testosterone levels start declining in our mid-twenties but
symptoms usually do not arise until menopause and andropause (the
state resulting from declining levels of testosterone in men).

SYMPTOMS OF LOW TESTOSTERONE

Decreased libido Night sweats
Fatigue Hot flashes
Increased abdominal fat Aches and pains
Loss of bone and muscle mass Facial wrinkles

Decreased sexual performance in men Lack of self-confidence

Testosterone Excess

1 usually see high testosterone levels only in someone taking too
high a dose of exogenous testosterone or in women with polycystic
ovarian syndrome (PCOS). High testosterone levels can lead to
symptoms of aggression, increased facial hair, and acne. PCOS is a
common cause of amenorrhea (absence of menstrual period) and
infertility in women, so if you are experiencing these symptoms, do
have your testosterone levels checked and PCOS ruled out.

SYMPTOMS OF HIGH TESTOSTERONE
Excessive facial hair (women) [Irritability and/or aggression

Ovarian cysts (women) Oily skin and hair
Acne Infertility (women)
DHEA

Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), like testosterone, is a building
hormone. However, it is produced and released by the adrenal

glands, so it is important to note that symptoms of excess or low
DHEA can often mimic both testosterone and cortisol imbalances.

DHEA Deficiency
DHEA levels start declining in our early thirties, but like
testosterone, symptoms usually do not appear until later. However,
if there is chronic stress, DHEA levels can decline quicker, resulting
in an earlier onset of symptoms.

SYMPTOMS OF LOW DHEA
Loss of muscle tone Increased | Difficulty concentrating
abdominal fat Decreased libido
Loss of body hair (pubic and
underarms)

Decreased tolerance to noise

DHEA Excess

Excess DHEA is usually seen only in someone with adrenal disease,
acute stress, polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS), or someone
taking excessive amounts of DHEA supplements. Over the past few
years, 1 have been seeing more and more women with PCOS
Showing high DHEA levels.

SYMPTOMS OF HIGH DHEA
Oily skin and acne Sugar cravings
Excessive facial hair (women) Mood changes
Estrogen

Estrogen, like testosterone, is important for both men and women,
only in the reverse amounts: women have more, men have less.
Estrogens are responsible for the secondary sex characteristics in

women, such as breast development, widening of the pelvis, and the
distribution of fat around the hips and the thighs. It has many
effects on different tissues, including the brain, breasts, thyroid, and
bone. Estrogen actually blocks bone loss, which is why
postmenopausal women with decreased estrogen levels are at a
higher risk of developing osteoporosis.

‘As mentioned earlier, there are three different types of estrogen:
estrone, estradiol, and estriol. For a quick review of these estrogens,
please refer back to Chapter 2: “What Are Hormones and Why Are
They Important?”

Estrogen Deficiency
Estrogen deficiency is most often seen in postmenopausal women.
Throughout menopause the ovaries slowly decrease their estrogen
production, and it is up to our adrenal glands to take over.
However, usually by this point in our lives, our adrenal glands are
tired and are having a hard enough time just producing enough
cortisol. As a result, our estrogen levels, which are already naturally
declining, can decline even quicker. Symptoms of this estrogen
deficiency are the typical menopause symptoms.

SYMPTOMS OF LOW ESTROGEN

Hot flashes and night sweats [Dry skin
Dribblin of urine pon coughing or pu
sneezing I

Wrinkles around eyes and lips Bone loss,

| osteoporosis
Low mood and depression [Foggy thinking
Vaginal dryness [Memory lapses
Irregular menstrual cycles Hair loss

Estrogen Excess

Estrogen excess is a condition that I am seeing more and more in my
practice. Our environment is filled with xenoestrogens, chemicals
that mimic estrogen in our body. These xenoestrogens are found in
many different plastics, cleaning supplies, cosmetics, water, and
meat and dairy products. Xenoestrogens build up in our bodies,
causing abnormally high levels of estrogen and estrogen-excess
symptoms. Estrogen excess usually goes hand in hand with
progesterone deficiency, so these two conditions have similar PMS-
type symptoms.

SYMPTOMS OF HIGH ESTROGEN
Difficulty sleeping "Anxiety and nervousness
Easily irritated and agitated Low mood or depression
Heavy menstrual periods | Menstrual cramps
Fibrocystic breasts [Uterine fibroids
Tender, swollen breasts Irritable and more emotional

before menstrual period before menstrual period
Progesterone

Progesterone, like estrogen, has receptors all over the body. Until
about 30 years ago, a woman who had a complete hysterectomy
(which is the removal of the ovaries and uterus) was given only
estrogen and not progesterone because doctors at the time thought
that progesterone influenced only the uterus. But they were so
wrong. Progesterone has many different functions throughout the
body; it not only maintains pregnancy and helps regulate the
menstrual cycle, but it also acts as a natural antidepressant, protects
the breasts from excess estrogen, and is a cardiovascular protectant.
It is an important hormone to keep at optimal levels.

Progesterone Deficiency

Throughout menopause progesterone levels slowly decline, leading
to many different symptoms. However, I have noticed more and
more premenopausal women also presenting with progesterone
deficiencies, such as PMS and/or difficulty conceiving. Low
progesterone levels during pregnancy have been associated with an
increased risk of first trimester miscarriages, so it is important to
ensure you have adequate levels during pregnancy.

SYMPTOMS OF LOW PROGESTERONE

Difficulty sleeping "Anxiety and nervousness

Easily irritated and agitated Low mood or depression

Heavy menstrual periods | Menstrual cramps

History of miscarriages [Uterine fibroids

Tender, swollen breasts Irritable and more emotional
before menstrual period before menstrual period

Progesterone Excess
Progesterone excess is not very common. I usually see it only in
women taking too high a dose of bioidentical or synthetic
progesterone.

SYMPTOMS OF HIGH PROGESTERONE
Drowsiness and depression Nausea
Increased acne and faci

hair Breast swelling

Thyroid Hormones

The thyroid hormones are important for maintaining our
metabolism, body temperature, and energy levels. If there is an
imbalance with these hormones, you can experience changes in
weight, energy, appetite, and body temperature.

Thyroid Deficiency

Thyroid deficiency is called hypothyroidism. Like adrenal fatigue, it
is currently one of the most underdiagnosed conditions. The
problem is that hypothyroidism isn't being readily diagnosed; the
normal reference range for thyroid hormones is much too wide, so
many people with low thyroid symptoms are told they have normal
results and are given no further testing or treatment. If you suspect
hypothyroidism but your doctor tells you that your results are
normal, I highly suggest you go for a second opinion to a health
professional familiar with thyroid diagnosis and treatment.

Thyroid hormone production and metabolism is quite complex
and is often influenced by many different factors. Nutritional
deficiencies, stress, autoimmunity, digestive disturbances, and
fluctuation of your other hormones can all influence your thyroid
function.

SYMPTOMS OF LOW THYROID

Fatigue and low mood Constipation

Difficulty getting up in the Headaches and migraines
morning

Difficuldy losing weight Cold hands and feet
Menstrual cramps Sensitivity to cold

Dry skin and hair Hair loss

Loss of lateral one-third of
eyebrows

Thyroid Excess

An excess of thyroid hormones is called hyperthyroidism. It is
usually caused by an autoimmune response toward the thyroid
gland. Hyperthyroidism is readily diagnosed in comparison to
hypothyroidism and usually does not fall through the cracks of the
medical system.


SYMPTOMS OF HIGH THYROID

Increased weight loss

Increased appetite Anxiety,
nervousness

Menstrual cramps

Tremors

Frequent bowel movements

Rapid heartbeat Frequent
sweating

Muscle weakness


CHAPTER 5

Recommended Laboratory
Testing

ABORATORY TESTING is used as a confirmation in the diagnoses of

ous hormonal imbalances. There are many different types of lab
tests, including blood, urine, and saliva. All three of these are useful
when testing hormone levels.

Blood Tests

Below is a list of the hormones I typically test in the blood:

Female Blood Profile
Complete blood count
Chemistry panel
Lipid panel
FSH, LH
TSH, free T4, free T3
Estradiol, estrone and estriol
Progesterone

Total and free testosterone
Dihydrotestosterone (DHT)

Sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG)
Vitamin D3

Vitamin B12

Ferritin

DHEAs

Cereactive protein

Male Blood Profile
Complete blood count
Chemistry panel
Lipid panel
Prostate specific antigen (PSA), percentage free PSA
TSH, free T4, free T3
Estradiol
Progesterone
Total and free testosterone
Dihydrotestosterone (DHT)
Sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG)
Vitamin D3
Vitamin B12
DHEAs
Cereactive protein

Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH)
are tested to help determine if a woman is ovulating, in menopause,
or if PCOS is a concern. These hormones normally increase in
postmenopausal women because they are trying to signal your
ovaries to produce more estrogen and progesterone.

Estradiol, estrone, progesterone, testosterone, and DHEA are
tested to confirm deficiencies or excesses of these hormones, and
also to monitor treatment and dosages if using bioidentical
hormones. TSH, free T4, and free T3 are measured to assess if there
is a thyroid hormone deficiency or excess. Vitamin B12, vitamin D3,


and iron are very common deficiencies, so these are always part of
my routine testing. In order to evaluate iron stores, I always test
ferritin, as it is a more accurate determinant of iron status. Iron
deficiency is very common in premenopausal women due to the
‘monthly menstrual cycles.

Cereactive protein (CRP) is a marker of inflammation that is tested
to help evaluate the risk of future heart disease and inflammatory
conditions.

‘The complete blood count (CBC), chemistry panel, and lipid panel
are used to evaluate your blood cells, electrolytes, and cholesterol
levels. These are all baseline tests that are routinely checked with
your annual physical exam.

There are some additional tests for men, one of which is called
prostate-specific antigen (PSA). This test is used to evaluate
inflammation and cancer of the prostate gland, as well as to help
determine the aggressiveness of the cancer and monitor prostate
cancer treatment progress. Every man above the age of 30 should
have his PSA levels monitored yearly.

Below I have included my optimal values for a few of the
hormones tested in the blood. These values differ from the set
normal reference ranges given by the laboratory, as I feel some of
the set ranges are too wide.

‘Hormone Female Male
‘TSH 0.8-2 mIU/L | 0.8-2 mIU/L
Upper third of | Upper third of
Free T4 reference reference
range range
Upper third of | Upper third of
Free T3 reference reference
range range
Total testosterone 50-80 ng/dl Te 00
Free testosterone 1.0-2.3 pg/ml | 18-28 pg/dl
DHEAs 150-300 400-600


ug/dl ug/dl
Progesterone (postmenopausal) [2-8 pg/ml
Progesterone (premenopausal
women on day 21 of menstrual| 15-23 ng/ml

cycle)
Estradiol (postmenopausal) 80-200 pg/ml
Estradiol (premenopausal) 80-400 pg/ml

Salivary Tests

Saliva samples are used in the evaluation of cortisol levels. Free
cortisol easily passes into tissues, making saliva samples an accurate
measure of the actual amounts of cortisol affecting our tissues and
glands. I also prefer salivary cortisol testing because blood cortisol
levels can be falsely elevated. Having your blood drawn is a stressful
situation, and when we are stressed, our body releases cortisol,
resulting in higher serum concentrations. In these cases, a cortisol
deficiency may be hidden because the acute stress of the blood draw
increases blood cortisol levels, resulting in your cortisol levels
appearing normal when they may actually be low.

Cortisol saliva samples are collected at four different times over
the course of one day. Cortisol has a natural daily rhythm, with
levels increasing early in the morning and slowly decreasing
through the afternoon and evening. By taking cortisol at four
separate times, we get a more accurate assessment.

Urinary Tests

Urine is incredibly useful for testing hormone metabolites and
assessing estradiol, estrone, estriol, cortisol, and testosterone levels.
Urinary Metabolite Testing

2-hydroxyestrone

16a-hydroxyestrone

5a-androstanediol
Sb-androstanediol

Sometimes estrogen and testosterone are metabolized into unwanted
and potentially harmful by-products. Because of this, it is important
to measure these metabolites to ensure optimal metabolism and
conversion of your hormones, particularly when using bioidentical
hormones.

I recommend discussing the tests most appropriate for you with
your health-care provider. Some tests may be omitted, while others
may need to be added. When you receive the results, you can then
review them together with your health-care provider to develop a
treatment program suitable for your specific imbalances. If your
doctor is not on board with testing your hormones, I have included
alist of labs offering home testing in the Appendix.


Happy Hormones Treatment
Program

CHAPTER 6

Nutrition for Happy Hormones

Why Nutrition Is Important

When it comes to balancing hormones, the first place to start is with
a healthy eating program. Many foods benefit our natural
production and balance of hormones, whereas other foods can
decrease production of beneficial hormones, increase production of
hormone disruptors, and decrease our detoxification pathways.

Quite often you can restore your hormone health just by adapting
a healthy eating program. We are what we eat, so if you eat a
healthy, balanced diet, your body will also come into balance. You
can be well on your way to balanced hormones and a healthier body
and mind simply by following these guidelines.

By following this general nutrition program, you will notice
increased energy, better sleep, weight loss (if not already at your
optimal weight), and less digestive disturbance. Try not to think of
this program as a diet. It is merely a set of guidelines to help you
have a more nutrient-rich diet so your body can function at its full
capacity. Some people find it helpful to have a “free” day, as this
will decrease the urge of wanting what you can’t have. Once a week


0 out and enjoy dinner with friends or have that food youve been
thinking about all week.

After following this program for a few weeks, you will notice a
significant decrease in your food cravings. Once our bodies get
accustomed to eating healthy whole foods, the desire and taste for
sweets and more processed foods decreases. You won't feel that
same satisfaction you did before when you eat them. So, try your
best to stick to the guidelines for the first few weeks to give your
body time to get used to the healthier, natural foods and develop its
“do not eat” signal for junk food.

Foods to Eat Freely

‘The foods that must comprise the majority of your diet are foods
that we have eaten for thousands of years that are found naturally
in the environment and have not been altered by today’s
‘manufacturing processes. These foods are organic vegetables, fruits,
lean meats, eggs, seeds, herbs, spices, and fish.

Organic Vegetables
Vegetables are high in many vitamins, minerals, antioxidants, and
fiber. All of these are necessary to maintain hormonal balance and
overall health in general. We have been eating vegetables since the
very beginning, so our bodies are quite efficient at digesting and
utilizing the nutrients obtained from them.
It is important to buy organic vegetables to avoid exposure to the
pesticides and herbicides that are so commonly sprayed on them.
These chemicals have many health-related risks.

The vegetables to focus on include:

Brassica vegetables

+ Broccoli
+ Brussels sprouts
Cabbage
Cauliflower

+ Collard greens

+ Turnips

Allium vegetables
Chives
Garlic
* Leeks
* Onion

Shallots

Leafy greens
Beet greens
- Cilantro
Collard greens
Dark lettuce
+ Kale
+ Mustard greens
Parsley
Spinach

Others
+ Asparagus

* Beets

« Carrots

« Celery

+ Cucumber

+ Radishes

+ Red and yellow peppers
- Squash

+ Tomatoes

+ Zucchini

Organic Fruit

Like vegetables, fruit contains vitamins, minerals, antioxidants, and
fiber. We can easily digest, absorb, and utilize the nutrients found in
fruit. However, some fruits are also high in sugar and should be
eaten only occasionally. These fruits include pineapple, mango,
papaya, and other tropical fruits It is important to buy organic fruit
to avoid exposure to the pesticides and herbicides that are so
commonly sprayed on the fruit trees. These chemicals have many
health-related risks.

‘The fruits to incorporate into your program include:
- All berries
« Apples
+ Apricots
Cherries
Kiwis

* Lemons

* Limes
+ Nectarines
+ Pears

* Plums

Organic Lean Meats and Eggs
It's important to ensure adequate protein intake. Protein is needed
to maintain muscle and bone mass, energy, detoxification, and
hormone production. However, you must be cautious with meat as
many types of meat contain traces of antibiotics, hormones, and
nitrates, all of which disrupt hormone balance and the immune
system.

Rule of thumb: Eat organic, grass-fed, hormone-free, and antibiotic-free
‘meat in moderation.

‘The lean animal protein you should incorporate into your program
includes:

Organic bison
Organic chicken and turkey
- Organic eggs

+ Wild game

Seeds and Healthy Oils
Seeds and oils, such as pumpkin seeds, chia seeds, olive oil, coconut
oil, and flaxseed oil, contain healthy fats called omega-3 fatty acids.
These omega-3 fatty acids are natural anti-inflammatories, support
our immune system, and play a critical role in hormone production.
Seeds also contain vitamins and minerals, such as zinc, selenium,
and B vitamins, which are vital for optimal hormonal balance.


‘The healthy fats found in seeds and oils are necessary to build our
cell membranes, allow for nerve transmission, protect our organs,
and support the production of so many different hormones. There
are some fats, however, that we do not need in our diet. These are
the fats that are superheated, overcooked, or burnt. High
temperatures change the structure of the fat, making it unhealthy
for us, so avoid fats and oils heated at high temperatures.

Rule of thumb: Include healthy, unheated fats, oils, and seeds in your
diet.

Seeds and oils you can incorporate into your program include:

oils
+ Coconut oil
+ Flaxseed oil

+ Olive oil

Seeds
Chia seeds
 Flaxseeds
- Hemp seeds
+ Pumpkin seeds
* Sesame seeds

+ Sunflower seeds

Seafood

Fish contains the same healthy fatty acids as oils and seeds.
However, fish is prone to mercury contamination, so it is important


to eat only fish containing the lowest mercury levels. It is beneficial
to focus on small, fatty fish from cold bodies of water, as they have
higher amounts of omega-3 fatty acids and lower amounts of
mercury.

Rule of thumb: Include small, cold-water fish into your diet and avoid
larger fish, like tuna or swordfish.

Fish to incorporate into your program include:
+ Anchovies
Arctic cod
- Catfish
+ Mackerel
« Perch
 Plaice
Pollock
* Salmon
Sardines
* Sole
- Tilapia
+ Trout (freshwater)
+ Whitefish

Herbs and Spices
Herbs and spices have been used for thousands of years to treat all
kinds of illnesses and afflictions. Some have antibacterial or anti-
inflammatory properties, while others work to increase circulation,
promote healthy digestion, or elevate mood. Plus they add flavor

and color to your meals. Experiment with different herbs and spices
to find out which ones you enjoy the most.

Herbs and spices to incorporate into your program include:
Basil
Black pepper
+ Cardamom
+ Cayenne pepper
Celery seed
+ Cinnamon
« Cloves
+ Coriander
+ Cumin
+ Dill
« Fennel
Garlic
- Ginger
+ Mustard seeds
* Nutmeg
+ Oregano
+ Rosemary
- Sage
+ Thyme
« Turmeric

+ Vanilla bean

Water and Unsweetened, Caffeine-Free Herbal

Tea

Be sure to drink at least two liters of water or herbal tea per day. If
your water source is chlorinated or fluorinated, purchase a highly
rated water filter to filter out those contaminants. There are many
different kinds of filters: some attach to your faucet, while others
are mounted underneath the sink or sit on the countertop.

Bottled water does not count as filtered water. Bottled water is
surrounded by plastic, which eventually leaches harmful chemicals
into the water. These plastic chemicals are incredible hormone
disruptors and need to be completely avoided.

Coffee and tea plants are heavily sprayed with pesticides, so try to
use organic tea as much as possible.

Rule of thumb: Drink filtered water, not from a plastic water bottle, and
use this filtered water to make caffeine-free, organic herbal teas.

Foods to Eat in Moderation

Red Meats

Red meat should be eaten in moderation, as it has been linked to an
increased risk of heart disease. Red meat contains saturated fats and
high amounts of arachidonic acid, a compound that leads to
inflammation in the body. Inflammation is a precursor to many
illnesses, including cardiovascular disease and cancer.

Furthermore, red meat is often contaminated with colorings,
antibiotics, and hormones, making it a somewhat processed food. So
when you do have red meat, ensure it is organic, grass-fed,
antibiotic-free, and hormone-free.

Rule of thumb: Red meats should be eaten only occasionally and must be
organic, grass-fed, antibiotic-free, and hormone-free.

Nuts and Legumes
Nuts are full of healthy oils, and legumes (such as beans and peas)
are great sources of protein. The downside to these is that they are
difficult for us to digest. They contain compounds that inhibit the
enzymes necessary for their digestion and metabolism. However, if
you sprout or cook your nuts and beans, these enzymes are
deactivated, making them much easier for your body to digest.

One nut to avoid completely is the peanut. Peanuts are more
prone to fungal contamination, which, when eaten, can contribute
to the growth of candida (yeast-like fungi) in the intestines. Candida
overgrowth can be the cause of gas, bloating, fatigue, and even
weight gain. Peanuts, like red meat, also contain arachidonic acid
and are great at activating our immune system, triggering an
allergic response.

Rule of thumb: Sprout or cook your legumes before eating; limit to three
times per week.

Whole Grains

Whole grains contain many essential vitamins and minerals, but like
legumes and nuts, they are difficult for us to digest. Be sure to cook
your grains thoroughly before eating and keep the portion to no
more than % cup cooked with each meal.

Rule of thumb: Cook your grains.

Some grains to incorporate into your nutrition program include:
+ Amaranth
* Brown rice

+ Millet
+ Quinoa

Foods to Avoid
Wheat and Gluten

About 85 percent of people I see in my practice have wheat and
gluten sensitivities. This sensitivity results in symptoms of Crohn's
disease, ulcerative colitis, irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), low
mood, weight gain, and low energy. I have seen the elimination of
gluten and wheat dramatically improve health.

Foods containing wheat and gluten that must be avoided include:
* Bread
+ Candy
+ Meat replacements
+ Packaged foods
« Pasta

Pastries and baked goods

Foods Containing Yeast
Any food containing yeast will contribute to the overgrowth of
candida in the intestines, which can then spread to other areas, such
as the skin, vagina, etc.

Symptoms of candida overgrowth include constipation, abdominal
bloating, gas, fungal skin infections, skin rashes, weight gain, and
fatigue. If you have any of these symptoms, completely avoid foods
containing sugar and yeast.

‘The foods containing yeast that must be avoided are:
Alcohol

+ Breads

* Cheese

Pastries and baked goods

Coffee and Black Tea

Both coffee and black teas are diuretics, which lead to dehydration
by increasing urine output. This dehydration is often the culprit in
difficult digestion, constipation, headaches, and dry, wrinkly skin.

Caffeine also stimulates the stress response. Over time this stress
response can contribute to a hormonal imbalance by overworking
the adrenal glands. The adrenal glands are responsible for our
cortisol and DHEA production, as well as some testosterone,
progesterone, and estrogen production in postmenopausal women.
They are crucial for our overall hormonal balance and often need
extra support.

Substitutions: You can substitute coffee and black tea with water
and herbal, caffeine-free tea.

Alcohol

Alcohol not only contributes to candida overgrowth, but it also
burdens your liver. The liver is the main organ responsible for
detoxification of our hormones and waste products. If it is busy
dealing with the detoxification of alcohol, it won't have time to rid
our body of these excess hormones or waste products.

Condiments and Sauces
Condiments are often loaded with salt, sugar, colorings,
preservatives, and flavorings. There is very little natural about them.
Avoid these as much as possible, and when you do have them,
ensure it is only in small amounts.

Substitutions: Experiment at home by making your own salad
dressings (olive oil, balsamic vinegar, and lemon juice), sauces
(homemade hummus, pesto, salsa, and guacamole), and marinades;
See the “Happy Hormones Recipe Collection” in the Appendix for
more ideas.

Sugar and Foods Containing Sugar
Candida love sugar and will rapidly grow in its presence. Sugar also
significantly decreases our immune system, rendering it susceptible
to various bacterial and viral infections and cancer. A diet high in
sugar also contributes to low energy and an increased risk of
diabetes.

High-fructose com syrup must be avoided at all costs. This
substance has been linked with excess weight gain and obesity, as
well as diabetes and heart disease. Check all of your condiments for
high-fructose corn syrup and, if it contains it, throw it out.

Sugar sources to be aware of include:
* Galactose
 High-fructose corn syrup
* Honey
* Lactose
* Maltose
+ Maple syrup
* Molasses
Products containing sugar
+ Sorbitol

+ Sucrose

Dairy Products

We are not designed to digest dairy products. No other animal
drinks milk past infancy, and we shouldn't either. The enzymes
needed to digest breast milk decrease throughout childhood, so as
adults, we have an incredibly hard time digesting it.

Because of this lack of enzymes, the dairy products we eat can
end up sitting in our intestines for up to three days before they're
fully digested. This results in an overgrowth of candida and an
increase in fermentation. This process creates digestive difficulty
with gas and bloating, as well as a state of toxicity.

The dairy industry has us believing that dairy products are the
only source of calcium, but this is absolutely untrue. You can find
calcium in higher levels than many dairy products in the following
foods:

Foods containing calcium include:
+ Almonds
* Beans
 Blackstrap molasses
+ Broccoli
+ Collard greens
Dark, leafy greens
- Figs
Spinach
+ Tempeh
« Tofu

Packaged and Processed Foods

Canned, bottled, boxed, and other packaged and processed foods
usually contain refined sugar products, preservatives, and colorings,
as well as other harmful hidden ingredients. These need to be
completely avoided.

Breads, Pastries and
Other Raised Baked Goods

These all contain high amounts of sugar. Sugar increases weight,
energy dips, and hunger, and decreases your immune response to
infections, cancer, and injuries. A high sugar diet will also
contribute to blood-sugar imbalances and an increased risk of
diabetes.

Processed and Smoked Meats
Deli meats, sausages, and smoked meats contain high amounts of
salt, as well as preservatives, colorings, and nitrates. These
chemicals promote heart disease and cancer and need to be avoided.

Fruit Juices and Soda
These all contain high amounts of sugar. Canned, bottled, and
frozen juices, as well as all sodas, need to be avoided. Freshly
squeezed fruit juice is fine.

What Now?

In summary, your meals should consist of vegetables, fruit, healthy
fats and oils, and lean protein. Ideally half of your plate should be
vegetables and the other half should be a combination of lean

protein, healthy fats and oils, cooked legumes, and/or gluten-free
whole grains.

Healthy Plate

Fresh Vegetables

Healthy Fars and Oils, Lean Protein and
lL

Include Foundation Supplements

I believe that everyone can benefit from three foundational
supplements: a high-quality multivitamin, omega-3 fatty acids, and
vitamin D. They all play such important roles and we really cannot
afford to have deficient levels in any of them.

High-Quality Multivitamin

A high-quality multivitamin is important to supply your body with
the nutrients that you may not be getting in your diet. I believe that,
no matter how healthy we eat, we are still at risk of having some
deficiencies because of overused and nutrient-depleted soil, and the
abundant use of pesticides and herbicides.

Pesticides and herbicides protect fruits and vegetables from
disease, but by doing this, the fruits and vegetables do not have to

produce as much of their own protectants and phytonutrients. But it
is these phytonutrients that supply us with powerful antioxidants,
such as carotenoids, flavonoids, and ellagic acid, and function to
fight particular cancers, decrease inflammation, and prevent
allergies. It is important to have enough of these phytonutrients in
our diet to prevent chronic disease and illness.

Soil conditions are the other big influence on the amount of
phytonutrients a plant contains. Modern farming practices now
allow for soil and fields to be used multiple times in a row for crop
production. However, the overuse of these fields results in the soil
being constantly stripped of its nutrients (phosphorus, zinc,
magnesium, zinc, selenium, etc.) and not having the time to
replenish. So the crops grown in these stripped fields are not able to
uptake as many of the nutrients as they would have in the past,
simply because those nutrients are not present in the soil.

Omega-3 Fatty Acids

Omega-3 fatty acids are very important to have in our diet because
our bodies are unable to produce them on their own. They are
crucial for optimal health and illness prevention. Omega-3s are
essential for optimal brain function, nerve cell transmission, and cell
membrane structure and function. They decrease inflammation and
blood clotting and promote hormone synthesis. Omega-3s are found
in high concentrations in fatty fish, flaxseed, and chia seeds, as well
as kelp and walnuts. It is best to aim for at least two grams of
omega-3 fatty acids per day.

Vitamin D3
Vitamin D is a powerful antioxidant, anti-cancer, and bone
promoter. It helps regulate our immune system, promotes hormone
synthesis, and increases mood. I test all of my clients for vitamin
D3, and only about 10 percent of them have optimal levels. This


decreased level of vitamin D increases the risk of immune disorders,
poor mood, particular cancers, and osteoporosis.

‘The primary source of vitamin D is from sunlight; however, cod
liver oil, halibut liver oil, and fatty fish also contain vitamin D. In
order to get enough vitamin D from sunlight, you should be in the
sun for at least 25 to 30 minutes every day with face, chest, and
arms exposed.

Avoid Food Sensitivities

I also recommend being tested for food sensitivities. If you have
unknown food sensitivities that you are eating on a daily basis, you
will have increased inflammation in your body, possibly resulting in
gas and abdominal bloating, acne, eczema, weight gain, migraine
headaches, and/or fatigue. If you experience any of these symptoms,
I highly suggest food-sensitivity testing.

Food-sensitivity testing is different from food-allergy testing in
that food-allergy testing most often involves an allergist’s skin-prick
test. The allergist is testing if you have an allergic reaction instead
of a sensitivity. Allergic reactions can present themselves as hives,
eczema, breathing difficulties, and anaphylaxis, and generally
involve the IgE antibody and histamine release. People with food
allergies typically present with symptoms within a few minutes to a
few hours after eating the allergic food.

Food sensitivities, on the other hand, involve the IgG antibody
and often do not show symptoms for at least 2 to 48 hours later. The
symptoms are more generalized and often hard to trace back to a
particular food. This is why it is important to actually get a food-

Helpful Tips

In order to make this diet transition easier for you, try making
extras at dinner and save the leftovers for lunch the next day. See

the “Recipe Collection” section for more ideas and recipes. If the
diet described here is a dramatic change for you, your body may
require a couple of weeks to adapt. Because this program is in part a
detoxification program, you may feel tired for the first week or so,
but keep with it. It will pay off in the end!

After about three weeks, you will begin to feel much better than
you did before. And you will start to see your body, energy, weight,
‘and mood change for good!


CHAPTER 7

Natural Solutions for Estrogen
Excess: PMS, Irritability, and
Weight Gain

STROGEN IMBALANCES can arise from various factors. Nutritional
ciencies, environmental toxicity, slow liver detoxification,
progesterone deficiency, aging, and stress can all contribute to
estrogen imbalances. But with the proper support, your estrogen
levels can be restored and maintained at optimal levels.

As I mentioned in the previous chapters, estrogen excess is a
condition that I am seeing more and more often. Our environment is
filled with xenoestrogens, chemicals that mimic estrogen in our
body. These xenoestrogens are readily found in different plastics,
cleaning supplies, cosmetics, water, and meat and dairy products.
They build up in our bodies, causing abnormally high levels of
estrogen and symptoms associated with estrogen excess. Estrogen
excess often results in a relative progesterone deficiency, so both
estrogen excess and progesterone deficiency have a similar symptom
picture. The most common symptoms associated with estrogen
excess are the typical PMS symptoms of breast tenderness,


irritability, and heavy menstrual bleeding. Women with higher
estrogen levels are also at higher risk of developing fibrocystic
breasts, uterine fibroids, and ovarian cysts.

With estrogen excess, the goal is to improve your bodys
detoxification, avoid any further sources of xenoestrogens, and
counterbalance with progesterone.

‘The diagram on the following page shows our liver detoxification
pathways. This liver detox system is responsible for detoxifying our
bodies from any harmful substances, as well as excess hormones
such as estrogen. In the diagram you can see that many different
vitamins are needed for this to happen, so it is important to ensure
optimal levels of these nutrients.

Liver Detoxification

Liver Detoxification

Tons —»/ Step] —» Step? —» Waste Products

error SER ) |

LSEIONS ps Gotattr iors
bo

Ble Urine

«Eliminated fr6m Body

Bowels

Step 1: Diet Support

In addition to the dietary guidelines outlined in the chapter
“Nutrition for Happy Hormones,” women with estrogen excess may

benefit from extra fiber and lower amounts of sugar, caffeine, and
alcohol.

Increase Fiber
Fiber binds up excess estrogen in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and
excretes it out of the body. It has been shown that women with a
diet higher in fiber have less estrogen excess-related symptoms, such
as irritability, breast tenderness, and bloating.

Decrease Alcohol and Caffeine
Alcohol, caffeine, and estrogen are all metabolized in the liver. If
our liver is busy detoxing the caffeine and alcohol, it doesn't leave
as much time or energy for estrogen detoxification. So, if you have
estrogen excess, it is important to avoid alcohol and caffeine as
much as possible.

Decrease Sugar

Many studies have shown that women with diets high in sugar have
more estrogen-excess symptoms than women with diets lower in
sugar.

Step 2: Lifestyle Support

Healthy lifestyle choices are vital for optimal hormone balance.
Adequate sleep, minimal stress, exercise, and avoidance of
xenoestrogens are all important for balanced estrogen levels.

Avoidance of Xenoestrogens

The most important lifestyle change you can make is to avoid
further exposure to xenoestrogens. Xenoestrogens are found in our
food, water, personal hygiene products, and plastics.

Below is a table showing some of the common sources of
xenoestrogens.

COMMON SOURCES OF XENOESTROGENS
PCBs, BPA Plastics
Cosmetics containing phthalates and parabens Dairy products
Dry cleaning chemicals Pesticides
Birth-control pills Cleaning supplies|

Organic Foods

Focus on organic foods as much as you can. Pesticides and
herbicides are high in xenoestrogens and should be avoided as much
as possible. If you are to purchase only a few organic items, I
suggest focusing on organic, hormone-free animal meats and dairy
products.

Filtered, Non-Bottled Water

It is recommended you drink filtered tap water instead of bottled
water. Plastic water bottles contain many different chemicals,
including xenoestrogens, which can seep into the bottled water. This
leaching of chemicals is particularly bad when the bottle is heated
or left for a long time before being drank.

Plastic Avoidance

Xenoestrogens are present not only in plastic water bottles, but also
in food storage containers and plastic bags. It is best to store your
food in stainless steel or glass containers whenever possible.

Cosmetics

Cosmetics are another huge source of xenoestrogens. Both estrogen
and xenoestrogens are added into various cosmetics. It is best to use
‘mineral-based cosmetics and/or ones with ingredients that you can
pronounce and are familiar with.

Cleaning Supplies
Conventional cleaning supplies contain xenoestrogens. It is best to
swap out these conventional products with a supply of green
cleaners.

For more information on safer cosmetics and cleaning supplies,
check out the Environmental Working Group (wwiw.ewg.org).

Step 3: Nutritional Support

Nutritional support includes the vitamins essential for liver
detoxification, as well as a couple of minerals known to decrease
estrogen excess-related symptoms.

Calcium and Magnesium
Calcium and magnesium have been shown to be beneficial for
women experiencing estrogen-excess symptoms of PMS. They
decrease breast tenderness, water retention, migraines, and
irritability.

Magnesium is found in high concentrations in Brazil nuts,
almonds, pecans, cashews, Swiss chard, kidney beans, soybeans,
brown rice, and rye.

Calcium is found in high concentrations in turnip greens, spinach,
sardines, spinach, tofu, broccoli, collard greens, and dairy products.

Calcium 600 mg daily
Magnesium 300 mg daily


Indole-3-carbinol and Diindolylmethane

Indole-3-carbinol (13C) is a compound found in high concentrations
in cruciferous vegetables, including broccoli, cauliflower, Brussels
sprouts, and cabbage. When ingested, I3C is converted to
diindolylmethane (DIM), which is then absorbed in the intestines.
DIM is the primary contributor to 13C’s beneficial properties,
selectively binding to estrogen receptors and acting as an estrogen
antagonist.

13C also promotes the metabolism of estrogen in the liver so it can
be safely excreted out of the body.

Indole-3-carbinol/Diindolylmethane 200 mg, 1-2 times daily

Vitamin B Complex
B vitamins, in particular B2, B3, B6, B9, and B12, are needed for
liver detoxification. The liver is our primary detoxification organ
and is the main way we metabolize excess hormones. B vitamins are
found in high concentrations in fish, poultry, pork loin, beef, whole
grains, and various nuts and seeds.

Vitamin B At least 30 mg of vitamin B1 and B2, 50 mg of B6,
Complex and at least 800 meg of vitamin B9 and B12 daily

Vitamins A, C, and E
Vitamins A, C, and E are all strong antioxidants necessary for our
liver detoxification. These vitamins also protect our cells from
damage and can have a beneficial effect in nerve disorders,
inflammatory diseases, and cancer. See the table below for the foods
rich in these vitamins.


Vitamin Food Sources
Liver, collard greens, spirulina, spinach,

Vitamin A carrots, sweet potato, papaya, apricots
_— Acerola berries, bell peppers, guava,
Vitamin C watermelon, broccoli Brusca sprouts, kiwi
Sunflower oil and seeds, almonds, pecans,
Vitamin E sweet potato, tempeh, hazelnuts, flaxseed
oil, wheat germ oil
Vitamin A 5000-10,000 IU daily*
Vitamin C 1,000 mg, 2-3 times daily
Vitamin E
(Mixed 400-800 IU daily
Tocopherols)

“Not to be taken when pregnant

Amino Acids

Amino acids are the building blocks of protein. They are necessary
for our everyday metabolic processes, such as the production of
hormones, neurotransmitters, and enzymes, as well as for
detoxification and energy production. It is essential we have enough
protein in our diets, whether we have hormonal imbalances or not.

‘The amino acids most important for helping our body rid itself of
excess estrogen are glutamine, lysine, camitine, taurine, and
cysteine. These are found in high concentrations in animal products,
such as poultry, fish, beef, and dairy.

Foundation Supplements
I believe that everyone can benefit from three foundational
supplements: a high-quality multivitamin, omega-3 fatty acids, and
vitamin D. A high-quality multivitamin should have the

abovementioned vitamins and minerals in adequate amounts. I've
thoroughly discussed the benefits of these supplements in the
chapter “Nutrition for Happy Hormones,” as I think they should be
part of your daily diet.

Step 4: Herbal Support

Vitex agnus-castus
(Chaste-tree Berry)

Vitex is a commonly used herb for female hormonal imbalances. It is
called a pituitary balancer as it directly affects the production and
release of pituitary hormones. It is thought to increase the
production of luteinizing hormone, while inhibiting the release of
follicle-stimulating hormone. This action favors progesterone
production relative to estrogen. Vitex has been used effectively to
decrease PMS symptoms, decrease the risk of miscarriage, promote
regular menstrual cycles, and decrease the growth of breast and
uterine fibroids.

Chaste-tree Berry (Standardized 200 mg, 1-2 times
Extract) daily

Evening Primrose Oil
Evening primrose oil is great for estrogen-excess symptoms if there
is a corresponding progesterone deficiency. Women supplemented
with evening primrose oil during the second half of their menstrual
cycle show marked improvements in the typical PMS symptoms of
irritability, breast tenderness, and swelling, as well as decreased
‘menstrual cramps.


Evening Primrose Oil 2-3 g daily

Silybum marianum
(Milk Thistle)

Milk thistle is mentioned here not because it directly influences
hormones, but because of its action on the liver. Milk thistle helps
stimulate the liver detoxification pathways and can actually protect
the liver from some of the harmful toxins it comes in contact with.
tion, milk thistle helps your body

By promoting liver detoxifi
‘metabolize excess estrogens.

Milk Thistle (Silymarin Standardized 160 mg, 1-2 times
Extract) daily

Taraxacum officinalis
(Dandelion Root)

Dandelion root, like milk thistle, works to promote liver
detoxification and aids in the metabolism of excess estrogens. If we
have slow liver detoxification, our estrogen levels can build up and
cause estrogen excess-related symptoms.

Dandelion (Dried Root) 2g daily

Step 5: Homeopathic Remedies

There are a variety of homeopathic remedies that people with an
estrogen excess could benefit from. Please see my recommended
homeopathic remedies in the Appendix.

Step 6: Hormone Replacement Support

In some cases, bioidentical progesterone support may be indicated.
As mentioned before, estrogen excess is often associated with a
relative progesterone deficiency. So, by supporting progesterone
levels, we can counterbalance the excess estrogen. There are two
types of progesterone hormone replacement: bioidentical and
nonbioidentical (synthetic). As you will read in “Hormone
Replacement Therapy” in the Appendix, bioidentical progesterone is
better, safer, and, in my opinion, the only choice. If you are still
menstruating, it is best to supplement with bioidentical
progesterone only during the second phase of your menstrual cycle,
as that is the time your progesterone levels are naturally increasing.

Prescription
Bioidentical progesterone is available in a few different forms:
transdermal, oral, and sublingual (under the tongue).

20 to 30 mg of bioidentical progesterone in a transdermal cream
or 100 to 200 mg in an oral pill form has been shown to
significantly improve estrogen excess and progesterone deficiency
symptoms.

BIOIDENTICAL PROGESTERONE REPLACEMENT
Compounded bioidentical progesterone available
Progesterone in individualized doses as transdermal creams,
oral formulations, or sublingual lozenges
Brand name for bioidentical progesterone; oral
Prometrium® formulation available in predetermined
dosages only


Case Example: Paula, Age 33

Symptor
Paula came to my office with complaints of severe PMS. She said
that, during the 10 days prior to her menstrual period, her breasts
would swell and become tender, and she would get extremely
depressed and irritable to the point of wanting to divorce her
husband. Her husband actually kept track of her menstrual period so
he would know when he needed to tread lightly. She had an
extremely stressful childhood, and now worked in a high-stress job
that left her exhausted every day. In addition to the PMS symptoms,
Paula was also having a lot of digestive problems with gas, bloating,
and constipati

Diagnosis:
Based on Paula's symptoms picture and lab results, she was
experiencing estrogen excess with a relative progesterone
deficiency, accompanied by low vitamin D and cortisol. I also ran a
food-sensitivity test, which showed sensitivities to gluten, wheat,
eggs, and yeast.

Treatment:

I started Paula on bioidentical cortisol and progesterone, along with

omega-3s, a high-quality multivitamin, vitamin D, indole-3-carbinol,

and a supplement to stop the overgrowth of intestinal yeast
andida). I also recommended she fully avoid her food sensitivities.

Results:
After six weeks, Paula’s gastrointestinal symptoms were completely
resolved, except when she would eat one of her food sensitivities.
Her mood and energy were improved, along with a lessening of her
PMS symptoms.

1 checked in with her another eight weeks later and she was still
doing well. After three months of treatment, her PMS was


significantly improved, with no breast swelling or tenderness and a
marked improvement in mood. Her husband was also happy with
the progress. Since Paula was doing so much better, we
discontinued the bioidentical cortisol and progesterone after three
months to see if her hormonal system was rested enough to pick up
the slack and keep her at optimal levels. Six weeks after stopping
the bioidentical hormones, she was still doing great.

CHAPTER 8

Natural Solutions for Estrogen
Deficiency: Hot Flashes,
Insomnia, and Dryness

STROGEN DEFICIENCY is most often seen in post-menopausal

en. Throughout menopause the ovaries slowly decrease their
estrogen production, and it is up to our adrenal glands to take over.
However, usually by this point in our lives, our adrenal glands are
tired and having a hard enough time just producing enough cortisol.
As a result, our estrogen levels that are naturally already declining
can decline even quicker, leading to the typical menopause
symptoms. With estrogen deficiency, the goal is to support natural
estrogen production, while decreasing the side effects of low
estrogen.

Step 1: Diet Support

In addition to the dietary guidelines outlined in the chapter
“Nutrition for Happy Hormones,” women with estrogen deficiency

may benefit from lower amounts of sugar, caffeine, spicy foods, and
alcohol.

Avoid Spicy Foods
Spicy foods have been shown to trigger hot flashes. Just by
removing spicy foods from your diet, you will notice a decrease in
the frequency of hot flashes.

Decrease Alcohol and Caffeine
Alcohol and caffeine, like spicy foods, also trigger hot flashes and
night sweats. But, in addition to this, increased consumption of
caffeine is correlated with lower estrogen levels in premenopausal
women.

Include Whole Soy in Moderation
Soy is very controversial. My clients often ask my opinion on so
should they eat it or should they avoid it? My recommendation is to
include whole soy (organic tofu, soybeans, and/or tempeh) in your
diet, but in moderation: no more than two times per week. Soy
contains estrogen-modaulating compounds, which help promote your
body's estrogen production and/or estrogen effects. The studies
surrounding the effect of soy on estrogen levels show conflicting
results, but what we do know is that Asian women who consume
whole and fermented soy have reduced menopausal symptoms of
hot flashes, night sweats, and osteoporosis. Processed soy products
(such as soy yogurt, milk, and cheese) often contain additives and
preservatives and are not recommended. In addition, I am seeing
more and more patients with sensitivities to soy, so before
increasing soy in your diet, I recommend you get tested for food


Step 2: Lifestyle Support

Healthy lifestyle choices are vital for optimal hormone balance.
Adequate sleep, minimal stress, routine, healthy eating, and exercise
are all important for optimal estrogen levels.

Decrease Stress

Stress can actually lead to decreased estrogen levels. When we
experience stress, our body can shunt the hormone pathways toward
cortisol production and away from progesterone and estrogen
production. Because of this, it is important to find ways in which
you can decrease your stress. Think of the areas in your life that
cause you the most stress and brainstorm about what you can do to
decrease this. It may be looking for a new job, slowing down on
nonpersonal and work commitments, or spending more time doing
things you enjoy.

Weight-Bearing Exercise
Exercise is another important aspect to consider. Women with low
estrogen levels have an increased risk of osteoporosis. Estrogen is
needed to block the breakdown of bone, so if our estrogen levels
decrease, so does our ability to maintain our bone mass. Weight-
bearing exercise, such as walking and lifting weights, helps maintain
and even restore bone mass.

Routine
Establishing a routine is important for overall hormonal balance.
Each day of the week, try to wake up and go to bed at the same
time, and eat your meals at the same times. By establishing a
regular routine, your stress response will decrease, your metabolism
will balance out, and you will feel an increase in energy and mood.

Step 3: Nutritional Support

The supplements used in estrogen deficiency focus on adrenal
function and bone health. As our estrogen levels decrease, we begin
to lose calcium from our bones, so we need to ensure we are getting
enough calcium and vitamins D and K to promote and maintain
bone health.

Vitamins C and E

Vitamins C and E are useful during menopause because they benefit
the adrenal glands. As we know, the adrenal glands are responsible
for producing the majority of sex hormones, including estrogen,
after menopause. We need to nourish the adrenal glands so they can
effectively cope with this increased demand. See the table below for
foods high in vitamins C and E.

Vitamin Food Sources

Acerola berries, bell peppers, guava, watermelon,
broccoli, Brussels sprouts, kiwi

Sunflower oil and seeds, almonds, pecans, sweet
potato, tempeh, hazelnuts, flaxseed oil, wheat-
germ oil

Vitamin C

Vitamin C 1,000 mg, 2-3 times daily
Vitamin E 400-800 IU daily

Calcium
Calcium plays an important role in maintaining bone mass in
postmenopausal women. As our estrogen levels decline, our bones
begin to lose calcium at a faster rate. This calcium loss is what can

eventually lead to osteopenia and osteoporosis in postmenopausal
women. Therefore, it is important to ensure you are getting enough
calcium. Great sources of calcium include turnip greens, spinach,
sardines, spinach, tofu, broccoli, collard greens, and dairy products.

Calcium Citrate 400 mg, twice daily

Vitamin D
Vitamin D is needed to maintain serum calcium concentrations. It
increases calcium levels by promoting its absorption in the
intestines. If serum calcium levels drop, your body will start
drawing it out of your bone tissue to compensate. Over time this can
lead to osteoporosis. Without sufficient vitamin D, as little as 10 to
15 percent of dietary calcium is absorbed.

Vitamin D is not only important for bone health. It has been
shown to protect against breast and colon cancer, elevate mood, and
balance our immune system.

Our primary source of vitamin D is through sun exposure. It is
estimated that 20 minutes of sun exposure, with face and arms
exposed, will produce about 200 IU of vitamin D. There are not
many nonfortified food sources of vitamin D other than oily fish,
such as sardines, herring, mackerel, halibut, and cod liver oil.

itamin D3 2,000 IU daily*

“Dose may vary, depending on blood serum levels

Vitamin K2
lcium and vitamin D, is important for
. It allows calcium ions to bind to bone so

Vitamin K2, like
‘maintaining bone m:


bone calcification can occur. Sources of vitamin K include turnip
greens, broccoli, cabbage, beef liver, and green tea.

Vitamin K2 5-10 mg daily”

“Can interfere with the anticoting effects of blood thinners, warfarin, and Counadin®

Foundation Supplements

I believe that everyone can benefit from three foundational
supplements: a high-quality multivitamin, omega-3 fatty acids, and
vitamin D. A high-quality multivitamin should have the
abovementioned vitamins and minerals in adequate amounts. I've
thoroughly discussed the benefits of these supplements in the
chapter “Nutrition for Happy Hormones,” as I think they should be
part of your daily diet.

Step 4: Herbal Support
Cimicifuga racemosa

(Black Cohosh)

Black cohosh is a well-known herb in the treatment of menopausal
symptoms. Many women report decreased severity and frequency of
hot flashes, night sweats, and irritability when taking black cohosh.
How black cohosh accomplishes this is still a bit of a mystery. Early
research showed it was a phytoestrogen capable of supporting our
bodys production of estrogen and suppressing the surge of
luteinizing hormone. However, new research is showing otherwise.
Despite this lack of understanding, we do know that it makes a
ant difference in menopausal symptoms.


Black Cohosh 200-400 mg daily

Medicago sativa
(Alfalfa)

Alfalfa is considered to be a phytoestrogen, an herb capable of
promoting estrogen production and/or estrogenic effects in the
body. It has been shown to improve the symptoms associated with
estrogen deficiency and menopause.

Alfalfa (Dried) 3-6 g daily

Tribulus terrestris
(Tribulus)

Tribulus is a not a well-known herb, but it is quite effective at
modulating estrogen levels and improving many symptoms
associated with estrogen deficiency and menopause. It is gaining
popularity as a fertility herb, as it has been shown to act as an
ovarian stimulant and normalize ovulation.

Tribulus (Standardized Extract) 200-400 mg daily

Step 5: Homeopathic Remedies

There are a variety of homeopathic remedies that people with an
estrogen deficiency could benefit from. Please see my recommended
homeopathic remedies in the Appendix.

Step 6: Hormone Replacement Support

Sometimes bioidentical hormone replacement may be necessary to
restore optimal estrogen levels. By replacing estrogen, menopausal
symptoms, such as hot flashes, vaginal dryness, night sweats,
irritability, and dry skin and eyes, will significantly improve.
Besides improving the symptoms associated with menopause,
estrogen replacement can also decrease your risk of future
cardiovascular disease and help maintain your memory and bone
and muscle mass.

Estrogen replacement is covered in more detail in “Hormone
Replacement Therapy” in the Appendix.

Bioidentical estrogen is available in a few different formula
application methods.

BIOIDENTICAL ESTROGEN FORMULATIONS
Estradiol [Tri-estrogen
Estriol [Estrace®
Bi-estrogen Gynodiol®

Case Example: Nina, Age 59

Symptoms:

Nina came to my practice one year after her menopausal symptoms
had started. She was hoping they would eventually go away, but
was getting exhausted waiting for that to happen. She complained of
poor sleep, hot flashes, irritability, and difficulty remembering some
very basic things.

Diagnosis:

Based on Nina's symptom picture and lab results, I determined she
was suffering from low estrogen and progesterone levels, as well as
suboptimal thyroid function.

Treatment:

1 prescribed Nina bioidentical bi-estrogen, oral progesterone (to help
with sleep), and a multivitamin designed for menopausal women to
ensure optimal vitamin D, K2, calcium, and some other trace
minerals important for bone health. I also suggested she take
omega-3s to help with her cognitive function and dry skin. In terms
of dietary recommendations, I asked her to avoid caffeine and spicy
foods.

Results:
After six weeks, Nina's hot flashes were completely resolved. Her
energy and sleep were both greatly improved. At this point, she
didn't notice much improvement with her memory, so we decided to
check in again in another six weeks.

At that next appointment, Nina was still sleeping well, with no
recurrence of hot flashes. She was feeling great. She thought her
memory was improving little by little, so we continued with the
same treatment program, expecting to see gradual improvement in
her memory. We continued to monitor her energy and thyroid
values to see if they would improve with the treatment program,
and sure enough, they came into optimal range.


CHAPTER 9

Natural Solutions for
Progesterone Deficiency:
Infertility, Irritability, PMS,
and Insomnia

Proosmon: IMBALANCES can arise from various factors.
tritional deficiencies, estrogen excess, slow liver detoxification,
and stress can all contribute to progesterone deficiency. But with
proper support, your progesterone levels can be restored and
‘maintained at optimal levels.

When supporting progesterone, it is important to mimic our
body’s natural production and release. You can see in the figure on
the following page how progesterone levels change throughout the
menstrual cycle. In premenopausal women, is best to support
progesterone only during the second phase of the menstrual cycle
(from day 14 to day 28) because this is when your progesterone
levels are normally increasing. However, since postmenopausal
women no longer have a regular menstrual cycle, progesterone
support can be given throughout the entire menstrual cycle. If


progesterone is cycled in postmenopausal women, menstrual
bleeding can occur within a couple of days of stopping the
progesterone.

“

° °

°° 9 OHO PSH ®~-
bl
i
—

Step 1: Diet Support

In addition to the dietary guidelines outlined in the chapter
“Nutrition for Happy Hormones,” women with progesterone
deficiency may benefit from extra fiber and lower amounts of sugar,
caffeine, and alcohol.

Increase Fiber
Fiber binds up excess estrogen in the GI tract and excretes it out of
the body. And as you read earlier, excess estrogen contributes to a
relative progesterone deficiency. It has been shown that women
with a diet higher in fiber have less progesterone deficiency-related
symptoms, such as irritability, breast tenderness, and bloating.

Decrease Alcohol and Caffeine

Alcohol, caffeine, and estrogen are all metabolized in the liver. If
our liver is busy detoxing the caffeine and alcohol, it doesn't leave
as much time or energy for estrogen detoxification. In this way,
‘moderate consumption of alcohol and caffeine can lead to an overall
estrogen excess and progesterone deficiency.

Decrease Sugar
Many studies have shown that women with diets high in sugar and
foods containing sugar have more progesterone deficiency
symptoms than women with diets lower in sugar.

Step 2: Lifestyle Support

Healthy lifestyle choices are vital for optimal hormone balanc
Adequate sleep, minimal stress, routine, healthy eating, and exercise
are all important for optimal progesterone levels.

Decrease Stress
Stress can actually decrease progesterone levels. When there is
excess stress, there is an increased need for cortisol. In order to get
this extra cortisol, our body shunts the hormone pathways away

from progesterone and estrogen production in favor of cortisol
production. This results in lower progesterone levels. So, it is
important to find ways in which you can decrease your stress. Think
of the areas in your life that cause you the most stress and
brainstorm what you can do to decrease this. It may be looking for a
new job, slowing down on nonpersonal and work commitments, or
spending more time doing things you enjoy.

Exercise
Exercise is another important aspect to consider. Women with low
progesterone levels often feel depressed and fatigued. Moderate
exercise increases our metabolism and the release of natural
endorphins, leading to increased energy and happier thoughts and
feelings.

Routine
Establishing a routine is important for overall hormonal balance.
Each day of the week, try to wake up and go to bed at the same
time, and eat your meals at the same times. By establishing a
regular routine, your stress response will decrease, your metabolism
will balance out, and you will feel an increase in energy and mood.

Step 3: Nutritional Support
Many women notice an improvement in their progesterone
deficiency symptoms just by increasing specific vitamins and
‘minerals. These nutrients include magnesium, calcium, vitamin BG,
and essential fatty acids.

Magnesium

Magnesium has been shown to be beneficial for progesterone-
deficient women. It decreases the symptoms of breast tenderness,
water retention, migraines, and irritability. Women with
progesterone-deficiency symptoms have been shown to have lower
levels of magnesium in their red blood cells compared to women
with optimal progesterone levels. Magnesium can be found in high
concentrations in Brazil nuts, almonds, pecans, cashews, Swiss
chard, kidney beans, soybeans, brown rice, and rye.

Magnesium (Elemental or Citrate) 400 mg, twice daily

Calcium

Calcium, like magnesium, has been shown to decrease the symptoms
associated with progesterone deficiency. In a few different studies,
women supplemented with calcium showed a marked improvement
in mood, breast swelling and tenderness, and overall water
retention. Calcium is found in high concentrations in turnip greens,
spinach, sardines, spinach, tofu, broccoli, collard greens, and dairy
products.

Calcium Citrate 600 mg daily

Vitamin B6
Vitamin B6 has been associated with improving progesterone
deficiency-related symptoms, such as irritability, low mood, fatigue,
and anxiety. It also contributes to increased levels of our happy
neurotransmitters, dopamine and serotonin. Vitamin B6 can be
found in many different species of fish, poultry, pork loin, bran
cereal, bananas, watermelon, avocado, and sunflower seeds.


Vitamin B6 50 mg, twice daily

Evening Primrose Oil
Evening primrose oil has been associated with a decrease in
progesterone deficiency-related symptoms. It contains an essential
fatty acid called gamma linolenic acid, known to balance hormones
and decrease inflammation. Women supplemented with evening
primrose oil during the second half of their menstrual cycle show
marked improvements in the typical PMS symptoms of irritability
and breast tenderness and swelling, as well as decreased menstrual

cramps.

Evening Primrose Oil 2-3 g daily

Foundation Supplements

I believe that everyone can benefit from three foundational
supplements: a high-quality multivitamin, omega-3 fatty acids, and
vitamin D. A high-quality multivitamin should have the
abovementioned vitamins and minerals in adequate amounts. I've
thoroughly discussed the benefits of these supplements in the
chapter “Nutrition for Happy Hormones,” as I think they should be
part of your daily diet.

Step 4: Herbal Support

Vitex agnus-castus
(Chaste-tree Berry)

Vitex is a commonly used herb for female hormonal imbalances. It is
called a pituitary balancer, as it affects the production and release of
various pituitary hormones. It is thought to increase the production
of luteinizing hormone, while inhibiting the release of follicle-
stimulating hormone. This action promotes the production of
progesterone. Vitex has been used effectively to decrease PMS
symptoms, decrease the risk of miscarriage, promote regular
menstrual cycles, and decrease the growth of breast and uterine
fibroids.

Chaste-tree Berry (Standardized Extract) 200 mg, twice daily

Smilax ornate
(Sarsaparilla)
Smilax is used for a variety of hormonal imbalances. It is thought to

have progesteronic actions and is best used to support the luteal
phase of the menstrual cycle.

Sarsaparilla 1-2 g daily

Taraxacum officinalis
(Dandelion Root)

Taraxacum does not directly influence hormone levels, but instead
works to promote liver detoxification. If we have slow liver
detoxification, our estrogen levels can build up, resulting in a
relative estrogen excess and progesterone deficiency.


Dandelion (Dried Root) 2g daily

A note about wild yam (Dioscorea villosa): it is a common belief that
wild yam increases progesterone levels. However, this is not the
case. Natural bioidentical progesterone is synthesized from wild
yam, but only after it has been manipulated in a laboratory. Wild
yam does contain progesterone precursors; however, we are unable
to convert those precursors into actual progesterone. So, if you are
taking wild yam in hopes of increasing your progesterone levels, it
won't do you much good.

Step 5: Homeopathic Remedies

There are a variety of homeopathic remedies that people with a
progesterone deficiency could benefit from. Please see my
recommended homeopathic remedies in the Appendix.

Step 6: Hormone Replacement Support

In some cases, hormone replacement may be necessary to restore
optimal progesterone levels. By replacing progesterone, symptoms
of insomnia, PMS, depression, and breast tenderness and swelling
will significantly improve. There are two types of progesterone
hormone replacement: bioidentical and nonbioidentical (synthetic).
Bioidentical progesterone is the better, safer choice (and, in my
opinion, the only choice). If you are menstruating, it is best to
supplement with bioidentical progesterone only during the second
phase of your menstrual cycle, as that is the time when your
progesterone levels are naturally increasing. If you no longer
menstruate, you can supplement with bioidentical progesterone
throughout the entire month.

Bioidentical progesterone is available in a few different forms:
transdermal, oral, and sublingual (under the tongue). Twenty to 30


mg of bioidentical progesterone in a transdermal cream or 100 to
200 mg in an oral pill form have been shown to significantly
improve progesterone-deficiency symptoms. Progesterone
replacement is covered in more detail in the “Hormone Replacement
Therapy” section in the Appendix.

BIOIDENTICAL PROGESTERONE REPLACEMENT
Compounded bioidentical progesterone available
Progesterone in individualized doses as transdermal creams,
oral formulation, or sublingual lozenges

Brand name for bioidentical progesterone; oral
Prometrium® formulation available only in
predetermineddosages

Case Example: Mary, Age 42

Symptoms:

When I first met Mary, she was experiencing chronic tiredness. She
had just taken a year off work to see if that would help, but
rding to her, it didn’t make a difference. She explained that her
and her husband had been trying to conceive for the past eight
‘months with little success. During those eight months, she conceived
once, but had a miscarriage eight weeks later.

Diagnosis:

After running a few lab tests, I confirmed that Mary had both
cortisol and progesterone deficiency. There was also an underlying
iron, vitamin B12, and vitamin D deficiency.

Treatment:

I started Mary on adrenal extracts, ashwagandha, omega-3s, iron,
and a high-quality vitamin containing vitamins C and E. I also
prescribed her a bioidentical progesterone cream to take from days


14 to 28 of her menstrual cycle. I talked with her about the
importance of eating a diet rich in vegetables, healthy oils, and lean
protein.

Results:

After six weeks, Mary noticed significant improvements in her
energy levels. She went from a 5 of 10 to an 8 of 10. She also said
she noticed an improvement in her concentration and mood. I
advised her to keep on the treatment program for another three
months before discontinuing the progesterone cream. Four months
down the road, Mary conceived and gave birth to a healthy boy nine
‘months later.

CHAPTER 10

Natural Solutions for Cortisol
Excess: Stress, Anxiety, and
Irritability

Coma IMBALANCE usually starts off as an excess, and then can
1 quickly or slowly progress into adrenal fatigue and cortisol
deficiency. Some people can function with high cortisol levels for
their entire life without progressing into adrenal fatigue, whereas
others can rapidly progress into adrenal fatigue after an illness or a
difficult life change.

With the proper support, your adrenal function can be restored
and your cortisol levels maintained at optimal levels. This support
most often includes nutritional support, lifestyle modifications, and
a variety of herbs or supplements.

Cortisol excess is most often associated with the stress response.
However, sometimes cortisol excess can be caused by a disorder
called Cushing's syndrome or Cushing's disease. If your cortisol
levels are extremely high, it is recommended you speak with your
physician to rule out Cushing's. Symptoms of cortisol excess include


anxiety, irritability, nervousness, difficulty sleeping, high blood
pressure, and even weight g:

Step 1: Diet Support

In addition to the dietary guidelines outlined in the chapter
“Nutrition for Happy Hormones,” people with excess cortisol benefit
from a diet high in protein and low in starch and sugar. Caffeine
and other stimulants should also be avoided.

Increase Protein

Excess cortisol can actually cause higher blood-sugar levels,
predisposing you to an increased risk of insulin resistance and
diabetes. A diet low in protein and high in starchy carbohydrates
will amplify this imbalance because starchy carbohydrates are
rapidly broken down into sugar in our bodies. So incorporate
protein with every meal to help stabilize your blood sugar and
decrease your risk of insulin resistance and diabetes. Some examples
of foods high in protein include nuts and seeds, poultry, beef, fish,
and nut butters.

Decrease Caffeine and Other Stimulants

Caffeine and other stimulants trigger the stress response in our
bodies, and if you already have excess cortisol levels, these will only
leave you feeling more stressed and anxious. In addition, your
adrenal glands will have to produce even more cortisol, which may
eventually leave them tired and unable to respond to stress
adequately in the future.

Decrease Sugar

Excess cortisol leads to increased blood-sugar levels and an
increased risk for insulin resistance and diabetes. To keep your
blood sugar at an optimal level, it is best to avoid sugar in your diet.
Even if you don’t have excess cortisol levels, it is still recommended
to avoid sugar, as it decreases our immune function and contributes
to obesity and heart disease.

Step 2: Lifestyle Support

Healthy lifestyle choices are vital for optimal hormone balance.
Adequate sleep, minimal stress, routine, healthy eating, and exercise
are all important for balancing cortisol.

Decrease Stress

It is important to find ways in which you can decrease your stress.
When you are stressed, your body goes into fight-or-flight mode,
shutting down the digestive and immune systems, while increasing
blood-sugar levels. Eventually this can lead to health problems, such
as high blood pressure, obesity, digestive complaints, and adrenal
fatigue. Think of the areas in your life that cause you the most stress
and brainstorm what you can do to decrease this. It may be looking
for a new job, slowing down on nonpersonal and work
commitments, and/or spending more time doing things you enjoy.

Moderate Exercise

Exercise is another important aspect to consider. Exercise not only
relieves stress, but also increases our metabolism and the release of
natural endorphins, leading to increased energy and happier
thoughts and feelings. However, intense exercise actually triggers
the stress response, so if you already have excess cortisol levels, it is
important to focus on light to moderate exercise. People with excess


cortisol respond very well to yoga and meditation, as both of these
significantly decrease stress.

Sufficient Sleep
Sufficient sleep is very important. You need a good night's rest to
function at an optimal level the next day and adequately respond to
stress. Many people with high cortisol have a hard time falling
asleep at night because they are a bit anxious. If this is the case with
you, think about skullcap, passionflower, and a meditation session
before bed.

Routine
Establishing a routine is important for overall hormonal balance.
Each day of the week, try to wake up and go to bed at the same
time, and eat your meals at the same times. By establishing a
regular routine, your stress response will decrease, your metabolism
will balance out, and you will feel an increase in energy and mood.

Step 3: Nutritional Support

There are a few different vitamins necessary for your adrenal
glands’ production of cortisol, norepinephrine, and epinephrine in
response to stress. These include vitamin C, vitamin E, vitamin BS,
and vitamin BG.

Vitamin C
Vitamin C must be present in optimal levels in order for your
adrenal glands to efficiently cope with stress. It is a necessary
cofactor for the actual production of cortisol, norepinephrine, and
epinephrine. Vitamin C is also a strong antioxidant, cancer


preventative, and collagen generator. It can be found in high
concentrations in acerola berries, guava, red chili peppers, green
and sweet bell peppers, grapefruit, watermelon, kiwi, Brussels
sprouts, cauliflower, and broccoli.

Vitamin C 1,000 mg, 2-3 times daily

Vitamin E

Vitamin E, like vitamin C, plays an important role in the production
of cortisol. The highest concentrations of vitamin E are found in the
adrenal glands and pituitary gland. Besides its role in the production
of cortisol, vitamin E is also a strong antioxidant and nerve and
muscle protectant.

Vitamin E is found in high concentrations in almonds, hazelnuts,
sunflower seeds, pecans, flaxseed oil, sunflower and safflower ofl,
sweet potatoes, and tempeh.

Vitamin E (Mixed Tocopherols) 800 IU daily

Vitamin B5

Vitamin BS has been associated with optimal adrenal function
during times of stress. It is needed for the synthesis of a few
different steroid hormones, including cortisol. Research has shown
that people with optimal levels of vitamin BS have an increased
ability to deal with stress. High concentrations of vitamin BS can be
found in chicken and beef liver, dark poultry meat, brewer's yeast,
beef, eggs, and brown rice.

Vitamin BS 500 mg, twice daily


Foundation Supplements

I believe that everyone can benefit from three foundational
supplements: a high-quality multivitamin, omega-3 fatty acids, and
vitamin D. A high-quality multivitamin should have the
abovementioned vitamins and minerals in adequate amounts. I've
thoroughly discussed the benefits of these supplements in the
chapter “Nutrition for Happy Hormones,” as I think they should be
part of your daily diet.

Step 4: Herbal Support

Withania somnifera
(Ashwagandha)

Ashwagandha is an extremely important herb for adrenal
imbalances. It is considered an adrenal adaptogen, meaning it can
bring adrenal function back into normal ranges. If cortisol levels are
too high, ashwagandha will actually work to decrease cortisol
production, thereby bringing cortisol levels back into normal range.
Ashwagandha has been shown to increase energy, strength, and
libido, as well as decrease inflammation.

Ashwagandha (Dried Root) ~~ 600 mg, twice daily

Eleutherococcus senticosus
(Siberian Ginseng)

Siberian ginseng, like ashwagandha, is an adrenal adaptogen. It is
great in calming anxiety, increasing endurance and stamina, and

improving mental fatigue. It is a great herb for both cortisol excess
and deficiency.

Siberian Ginseng (Dried Root) 800 mg, twice daily

Passiflora incarnata
(Passionflower)

Passionflower is a strong anxiolytic that can reduce irritability,
anxiety, and insomnia. It is an ideal herb for people with excess
cortisol who experience sleep-onset and sleep-maintenance insomnia
due to a stressed, busy mind.

Passionflower (Dried Aerial Parts) 500 mg, twice daily

Scutellaria lateriflora
(Skullcap)

Skullcap, like passionflower, is an anxiolytic herb. It decreases
anxiety, emotional stress, and insomnia, making it an ideal herb for
people experiencing stress and high cortisol levels. Skullcap is also
great for tension headaches.

Skullcap (Dried Root) 600 mg, twice daily

Step 5: Homeopathic Remedies

There are a variety of homeopathic remedies that people with high
cortisol could benefit from. Please see my recommended
homeopathic remedies in the Appendix.

Step 6: Hormone Replacement Support

Hormone replacement therapy is not indicated for cortisol excess,
unless there are accompanying hormonal deficiencies that need to
be supported.

Case Exampl

: Louise, Age 36

Symptor
As Louise walked into my office, I could already feel the stress
emitting from her. She was coming to her appointment straight from
work, where she was a paralegal with multiple deadlines and daily
stress. She said that in the past year she was constantly sick with
colds and flu, felt irritable, and had a hard time sleeping at night.
She said that, since she was so busy with work, she didn’t have time
to cook, exercise, or do anything for herself.

Diagnosis:

After speaking with her and ordering some lab tests, it turned out
she was in a cortisol-excess state with an underlying iron and
vitamin D deficiency.

Treatment:

1 first spoke with Louise about decreasing her stress. I asked her to
think of everything in her life that caused her stress and brainstorm
how she could decrease this. In addition, I asked her to go for a 20-
minute walk every day in the park next to her house and
recommended that she designate two hours every Sunday to prepare

meals for the next week. I mentioned the importance of decreasing
stress, establishing a routine, and avoiding any stimulants, such as
coffee and black tea. In terms of supplements, I prescribed her iron,
vitamin D, omega-3, a good-quality multivitamin, and an
ashwagandha and skullcap herbal formula to help modulate her
adrenal stress response.

Results:

After three weeks, Louise said she was feeling much better. She had
tually decided to leave her job and was currently looking for
another job with a more positive environment. Her energy increased
from 5 to 8 out of 10, and she was sleeping better. She said she
could sleep at night now because she was no longer worrying about
work. She had been walking every day in the park for the past two
weeks and made some meals at home. She said she felt more calm
and relaxed.

1 checked in with her eight weeks later, and she was still doing
well. She was keeping up with the walks, cooking on Sundays, and
getting lots of sleep. Her energy was still up at an 8, and she hadn't
been sick with a cold since our first appointment.

‘This case study really shows the affect of stress on our health and
just how important it is to identify stressors and decrease them
however you can.

CHAPTER 11

Natural Solutions for Cortisol
Deficiency: Fatigue, Brain Fog,
and Feeling Overwhelmed

Com IMBALANCE usually starts off as an excess, and then can
1 slowly or quite quickly progress into adrenal fatigue and
cortisol deficiency. Some people can function with high cortisol
levels for their entire life without progressing into adrenal fatigue,
whereas others can rapidly progress into adrenal fatigue after an
illness or a difficult life change.

With the proper support, your adrenal function can be restored
and your cortisol levels maintained at optimal levels. This support
most often includes nutritional support, lifestyle modifications, and
a variety of herbs or supplements.

Low cortisol and adrenal fatigue can be extremely debilitating for
some people. The fatigue, feelings of being overwhelmed, low
mood, and difficulty coping with stress can hinder daily
performance, leading to difficulties at work and home. When
looking at support for low cortisol levels, it is important to address
your individual symptoms and lab results in order to choose an


appropriate treatment program. The main goal of adrenal support is
to decrease stress and nourish the adrenal glands so they can
produce more cortisol themselves.

Step 1: Diet Support

In addition to the dietary guidelines outlined in the chapter
“Nutrition for Happy Hormones,” people with adrenal fatigue
benefit from a diet high in protein and low in refined carbohydrates.
Caffeine and other stimulants should also be avoided.

Increase Protein and Decrease Sugar

A higher protein diet will help stabilize your blood-sugar levels and
increase energy. Try to incorporate protein with every meal. Some
examples of foods high in protein include nuts and seeds, poultry,
beef, fish, and nut butters.

Sugar tends to leave adrenally fatigued people feeling even more
tired, so avoid sugar and foods containing sugar as much as
possible.

Decrease Caffeine and Other Stimulants

Caffeine and other stimulants trigger the stress response in our
bodies, so if you are already having a hard enough time dealing
with your everyday stress, these will only add more fuel to the fire.
You need to focus on decreasing stress from all sources: physical,
‘mental /emotional, and dietary.

Step 2: Lifestyle Support

Healthy lifestyle choices are vital for optimal hormone balance.
Adequate sleep, minimal stress, routine, healthy eating, and exercise

are all important for balancing cortisol.

Decrease Stress

You are most likely suffering from adrenal fatigue and low cortisol
levels because of high stress, so it is important to find ways in which
you can decrease this. Your adrenal glands need to recover, and
every little stress they have to deal with lengthens this recovery
process. Think of the areas in your life that cause you the most
stress and brainstorm what you can do to decrease this. It may be
looking for a new job, slowing down on nonpersonal and work
commitments, or spending more time doing things you enjoy and
less time doing things you don’t. Meditation is also a great way to
decrease stress, and 1 recommend it for everyone with adrenal
fatigue.

Exercise

Exercise is very healthy for us, but it is also a form of physical
stress, and with adrenal fatigue, you are already having a hard
enough time dealing with daily stressors. Because of this,
recommend exercising, but keeping it to the lighter exercises like
yoga, pilates, walking, and light weight lifting. When you have
adrenal fatigue, it is important to listen to your body and stop
exercising when you feel tired. Also, if you feel exhausted after
exercising either right after or the next day, this means you have
done too much. Listen to your body and work yourself up slowly.

Routine
Establishing a routine is important for overall hormonal balance.
Each day of the week, try to wake up and go to bed at the same
time, and eat your meals at the same times. By establishing a

regular routine, your stress response will decrease, your metabolism
will balance out, and you will feel an increase in energy and mood.

Step 3: Nutritional Support

‘The same supplements useful for cortisol excess are also essential for
adrenal fatigue and low cortisol levels. These vitamins focus on
supporting and nourishing the adrenal glands, whether they are
producing too much or too little cortisol. One important addition to
the nutritional support for adrenal fatigue are adrenal glandulars.

Adrenal Glandulars and Extracts

Adrenal glandulars are adrenal supplements made up of actual
adrenal gland tissue, usually from porcine or bovine (pig or cow)
sources. They provide your adrenal glands with the raw materials
they need during the recovery process. When adrenal glandulars are
added to a treatment program, the adrenal fatigue improves at a
quicker pace. But keep in mind that the recovery of the adrenal
glands is not a fast process; it can take anywhere from six months to
one year, but improvement is usually seen within the first few
months.

Adrenal Cortex Extracts 250 mg, 2-3 times daily

Vitamin C
Vitamin C is critical for adrenal gland function and recovery. It is a
necessary cofactor for the actual production of cortisol,
norepinephrine, and epinephrine. Vitamin C is also a strong
antioxidant, cancer preventative, and collagen generator. It can be
found in high concentrations in acerola berries, guava, red chili


peppers, green and sweet bell peppers, grapefruit, watermelon, kiwi,
Brussels sprouts, cauliflower, and broccoli.

Vitamin C 1,000 mg, 2-3 times daily

Vitamin E

Vitamin E, like vitamin C, plays an important role in the production
of cortisol. It must be at optimal levels in order for your adrenal
glands to recover and restore their hormones. The highest
concentrations of vitamin E are found in the adrenal glands and the
pituitary gland. Besides its role in the production of cortisol, vitamin
E is also a strong antioxidant and nerve and muscle protectant.
Vitamin E is found in high concentrations in almonds, hazelnuts,
sunflower seeds, pecans, flaxseed oil, sunflower and safflower ofl,
sweet potatoes, and tempeh.

Vitamin E (Mixed Tocopherols) 800 IU daily

Vitamin B5
Vitamin BS is necessary for optimal adrenal function during times of
stress. It is so essential for the synthesis of adrenal steroid hormones
that, if there is a deficiency, your adrenal glands can actually shrink
in size. High concentrations of vitamin BS can be found in chicken
and beef liver, dark poultry meat, brewer's yeast, beef, eggs, and
brown rice.

Vitamin BS 500 mg, twice daily


Foundation Supplements

I believe that everyone can benefit from three foundational
supplements: a high-quality multivitamin, omega-3 fatty acids, and
vitamin D. A high-quality multivitamin should have the
abovementioned vitamins and minerals in adequate amounts. I've
thoroughly discussed the benefits of these supplements in the
chapter “Nutrition for Happy Hormones,” as I think they should be
part of your daily diet.

Step 4: Herbal Support

Withania somnifera
(Ashwagandha)

Ashwagandha is an extremely important herb for adrenal
imbalances. It is considered an adrenal adaptogen, meaning it can
bring adrenal function back into normal ranges. If cortisol levels are
too low, ashwagandha will actually work to increase cortisol
production, thereby bringing cortisol levels back into normal range.
Besides acting as an adrenal adaptogen, ashwagandha also increases
energy, strength, endurance, and libido and decreases inflammation,
making it particularly useful in inflammatory conditions, such as
rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis, both of which are commonly
associated with adrenal fatigue.

Ashwagandha (Dried Root) ~~ 600 mg, twice daily

Eleutherococcus senticosus
(Siberian Ginseng)

Siberian ginseng, like ashwagandha, is an adrenal adaptogen. It
improves mental concentration, sustains energy levels and
endurance, and decreases irritability. It often has a very positive
effect on mood. Siberian ginseng is also considered to be an
immune-modulating herb, meaning it will strengthen the immune
system so it is better able to fight off illness. People with adrenal
fatigue often end up with cold after cold because of a weakened
immune system, and Siberian ginseng is a great herb to finally put
an end to that cold cycle.

Siberian Ginseng (Dried Root) 800 mg, twice daily

Glycyrrhiza glabra
(Licorice Root)

Licorice root is the most well-known herb for adrenal support. It has
been used for centuries in Asia, and is found in almost all patented
Chinese herbal formulations. Licorice has a compound in it called
glyeyrrhizin, which is structurally similar to cortisol, and which can
bind with cortisol receptors. Thus, it can give your adrenal glands a
bit of a break as your body thinks it has enough cortisol because of
the glyeyrrhizin. The glycyrrhizin can also increase the halflife of
cortisol, allowing it to function longer in the body. One thing to
mention about licorice is that it can increase blood pressure, so
people with high blood pressure should avoid it.

Licorice Root (Deglycyrrhizinated 500 mg, twice
Standardized Extract) daily

Step 5: Homeopathic Remedies

There are a variety of homeopathic remedies that people with low
cortisol could benefit from. Please see my recommended
homeopathic remedies in the Appendix.

Step 6: Hormone Replacement Support

Bioidentical Cortisol

When people are so worn down that they are unable to function in
their daily life, they may require an initial round of hydrocortisone.
Hydrocortisone has the exact same structure as cortisol in our
bodies, so it can bind to the same receptors to trigger the same
response. By supplying exogenous cortisol, your adrenal glands can
take a break and focus on restoring their function without having to
constantly produce cortisol. Bioidentical cortisol should not be taken
in excess of 20 mg per day in the treatment of adrenal fatigue.

Bioidentical cortisol is available in a few different forms:
transdermal, oral, and sublingual (under the tongue). Cortisol
replacement is covered in more detail in the “Hormone Replacement
Therapy” section in the Appendix.

BIOIDENTICAL CORTISOL REPLACEMENT
Compounded bioidentical cortisol available in
Hydrocortisone individualized doses as transdermal creams,
| oral tablets, and sublingual lozenges
Brand name for bioidentical cortisol; oral
Cortef formulation available in predetermined (and
often too high) dosages

Case Example: Lisa, Age 54

Symptoms:

I first met Lisa when she was extremely exhausted and run-down. It
was extremely difficult for her to get up in the morning, and she
didn't have energy to do anything except “just be.” She rated her
energy at a 3 of 10. She explained that she had to quit her job two
years ago because of fatigue and a persistent inability to focus and
complete tasks. She was also experiencing symptoms of PMS, with
irritability and migraines. She explained she had a very difficult
childhood and was currently in counseling.

Diagnosis:
Based on her symptoms and lab results, Lisa was experiencing
cortisol, DHEA, and progesterone deficiencies, as well as low
vitamin D levels.

Treatment:

I prescribed Lisa bioidentical cortisol, DHEA, and progesterone,
along with a high-quality multivitamin, omega-3 fatty acids, an
adrenal herbal combination, and vitamin D. I also recommended she
continue her counseling around her childhood trauma and focus on
a diet high in protein and low in gluten and wheat. I mentioned to
her the importance of decreasing stress, establishing a routine, and
avoiding any stimulants, such as coffee and black tea.

Results:

After just one week of following my recommendations, she said she
was feeling better than she could ever remember. She found herself
waking up without an alarm and even going out one night with
friends. She felt alive again. This new sense of energy had lasted for
about two weeks until she encountered a large stressor. After this
stressor, her energy plummeted again and she got another migraine.
I increased her dose of the bioidentical cortisol, DHEA, and the
herbal combination to try and get her back on her feet. After a few
days, she was able to pull out of the slump and again felt much
better.

1 checked in with her six weeks later, and she said she was feeling
so much better that she wanted to start work again. I advised her to
wait another few months to give her adrenals some time to recover
before starting a new job, where there would undoubtedly be some
initial stress. Her energy was up to an 8, her migraines significantly
decreased, and she was better able to deal with stress.

CHAPTER 12

Natural Solutions for Low
Thyroid: Fatigue, Weight Gain,
Low Mood, and Headaches

[ion IMBALANCES can arise from various factors. We can
lop an underactive thyroid because of nutritional deficiencies,
stress, autoimmunity, digestive disturbance, as well as imbalances in
our other hormones, such as estrogen or cortisol.

Step 1: Diet Support

In addition to the dietary guidelines outlined in the chapter
“Nutrition for Happy Hormones,” people with low thyroid function
benefit from a diet higher in complex carbohydrates and lower in
gluten and dairy products.

Increase Complex Carbohydrates

A diet higher in complex carbohydrates appears to increase thyroid
hormone production, so the addition of fruits, vegetables, and whole
grains is important for people experiencing low thyroid function.

Eat Brassica Vegetables in Moderation
Brassica vegetables (kale, broccoli, cabbage, cauliflower) are
extremely important for our liver detoxification pathways and the
metabolism of excess hormones. However, they appear to decrease
thyroid function. So, if you do eat a lot of these, I suggest cutting
back or cooking them, as cooking seems to lessen their inhibitory
effects on the thyroid.

Avoid Dairy and Gluten
Dairy and gluten are extremely important to avoid if your low
thyroid function is because of Hashimoto's thyroiditis, an
autoimmune condition that targets the thyroid gland. Both gluten
and dairy products have been shown to worsen the autoimmunity
involved with Hashimoto's thyroiditis.

Step 2: Lifestyle Support

Healthy lifestyle choices are vital for optimal hormone balance.
Adequate sleep, minimal stress, routine, healthy eating, and exercise
are all important for optimal thyroid balance.

Decrease Stress
Stress downregulates our thyroid hormone production and causes an
imbalance in other hormones, such as cortisol and DHEA. Think of
the areas in your life that cause you the most stress and brainstorm
about what you can do to decrease this.

Exercise
Exercise is another important aspect to consider. Exercise increases
your metabolism and energy and promotes weight loss.

If you have hypothyroidism, even the thought of exercising may
make you feel tired, so it’s important to start off slow. Walking is a
great way to get your body moving without too much exertion. Start
off with 15-minute walks and slowly work up. Walking is also a
great way to get in some “me” time and decrease stress.

Routine
Establishing a routine is also important for thyroid health. Each day
of the week, try to wake up and go to bed at the same time, and eat
your meals at the same times. By establishing a regular routine,
Your stress response will decrease, your metabolism will balance
out, and you will regain some of your energy. Routine also helps
with weight maintenance.

Step 3: Nutritional Support

Many people notice an improvement in their thyroid function just
by replacing deficient vitamins and minerals. Deficiencies in zinc,
selenium, iodine, and vitamins C and D are often associated with
low thyroid function.

Zinc
Zine is an important cofactor for the production of thyroid
hormones. It is needed for the conversion of T4 to T3, our active
thyroid hormone. T3 levels have been shown to increase in response
to zinc supplementation alone. Zine is found in high concentrations
in oysters, beef roast, collard greens, and sunflower and pumpkin
seeds, as well as other nuts and seeds.

Zinc Picolinate 20-50 mg daily*

“Can interfere with copper absorption; take 2 mg of copper for every 20 mg of sine

Selenium
Selenium is important in reestablishing thyroid balance by assisting
in the conversion of T4 to T3. Selenium supplementation has been
shown to directly increase T3 levels, while decreasing reverse T3
levels.
Selenium is found in high concentrations in Brazil nuts, halibut
and salmon, Swiss chard, blackstrap molasses, and oysters.

Selenium 200 meg daily

Iodine
Iodine is found in high concentrations in the thyroid gland. It
upregulates and binds with the enzyme thyroid peroxidase to
produce T4 and T3. In places where iodine deficiency is common
(such as Africa, Europe, and the eastern Mediterranean),
supplementing with it can make a big difference in bringing your
thyroid gland back into balance.

One thing to be aware of is the supplementation of iodine in
Hashimoto's disease. Since Hashimoto's disease is caused by an
autoimmune attack against thyroid peroxidase, upregulating it with
the addition of iodine can actually make the autoimmunity worse.
For people with Hashimoto's thyroiditis, 1 recommend avoiding
extra iodine supplementation.

Iodine is found in high concentrations in kelp, arame, cod fish,
halibut, sardines, and herring.


Iodine 200 meg daily

Vitamin D3
Vitamin D3 is of particular importance for the autoimmune thyroid
condition, Hashimoto's thyroiditis. Since vitamin D plays such a
large role in regulating our immune system, it can actually decrease
the severity of the autoimmune attack toward our thyroid gland.

Vitamin D is important not only for our thyroid health. It is also
needed to maintain our bone mass, increase our mood and energy,
and decrease our risk of certain types of cancer and autoimmune
diseases, as well as decrease our risk of diabetes. It is a very
important vitamin, and I suggest everyone have their vitamin D3
tested to ensure adequate levels.

‘The main source of vitamin D is sunlight. However, nowadays,
with the majority of us spending up to 80 percent of our time
indoors, there is no way to get enough sun exposure for adequate
vitamin D production.

Vitamin 2,000-5,000 IU daily, depending on serum vitamin
D3 D3 levels
Thyroid Glandulars

Porcine thyroid glandulars are greatly beneficial for restoring
thyroid function. They provide high-quality thyroid tissue with
many different enzymes, cofactors, and nutrients required for
optimal thyroid function. Many people feel an increase in energy
after starting glandular.

Thyroid Glandular (Porcine) 100 mg, 1-2 times daily


Foundation Supplements

I believe that everyone can benefit from three foundational
supplements: a high-quality multivitamin, omega-3 fatty acids, and
vitamin D. A high-quality multivitamin should have many of the
abovementioned vitamins and minerals in adequate amounts. I have
thoroughly discussed the benefits of these supplements in the
chapter “Nutrition for Happy Hormones,” as I think they should be
part of your daily diet.

Step 4: Herbal Support

Withania somnifera
(Ashwagandha)

Ashwagandha contains phytonutrients that lead to increased
production of both T4 and T3. It also acts as a powerful adrenal
adaptogen by supporting our adrenal glands and modulating our
stress response. If there is an accompanying adrenal and cortisol
imbalance, this herb is strongly indicated as part of the thyroid-
balancing program.

Ashwagandha (Dried Root) ~~ 600 mg, twice daily

Step 5: Homeopathic Remedies

There are a variety of homeopathic remedies that people with a low
thyroid could benefit from. Please see my recommended
homeopathic remedies in the Appendix.


Step 6: Hormone Replacement Support

Hormones are regularly prescribed for hypothyroidism. The most
common prescriptions include cytomel, levothyroxine, synthroid,
Armour® Thyroid, and Nature-Throid®. These hormones are
beneficial in particular cases in which nutritional supplementation is
inadequate for thyroid gland restoration.

Thyroid replacement is covered in more detail in the “Hormone
Replacement Therapy” section in the Appendix.

THYROID HORMONE REPLACEMENT
Levothyroxine | Synthetic thyroxine (T4) Synthetic thyroxine
Synthroid (T4)
Brand name for desiccated thyroid gland; it
contains T3 and T4 hormones

Nature-Throid®

Armour® Brand name for desiccated thyroid gland; it
Thyroid contains T3 and T4 hormones
Cytomel Trade name for triiodothyronine (T3)

Case Example: Sarah, Age 44

When I first met Sarah, she was experiencing the typical symptoms
of hypothyroidism: weight gain, fatigue, and chronic headaches. She
said that getting out of bed in the morning was incredibly difficult
for her and that, when she got home at the end of the day, it took
everything she had just to make dinner. Sarah rated her average
energy as 4 of 10. Her husband was concerned that there could be
something more serious going on with her health because of her
constant fatigue and headaches.

Diagnosis:

Lab testing confirmed that Sarah was experiencing symptoms of low
thyroid function. Her TSH was at 5.1 mIU/L, and her T3 and T4
levels were on the low end of normal.

Treatment:
I started Sarah on a high-quality multivitamin supplying optimal
amounts of zinc, selenium, and iodine, as well as omega 3s,
ashwagandha, and Nature-Throid® (desiccated thyroid gland that
contains both T3 and T4 hormones). I also advised her to avoid
gluten and dairy product

Results:

After three weeks, Sarah was feeling more energy than she could
ever remember. Her headaches disappeared and she lost seven
pounds. She responded very well to this treatment program, and six
months later, she was still doing great, with no recurrence of the
chronic headaches, except when she didn’t get enough sleep or
drink enough water. Her energy level increased to 8 of 10.

CHAPTER 13

Natural Solutions for DHEA
Deficiency: Poor Concentration,
Abdominal Fat, and Low Libido

ID) mommusoncstzros: (DHEA), like testosterone, is a building
one. It promotes energy, libido, and bone strength and helps
our body heal from injury. It also helps us cope with stress and
increases our energy and mood.

DHEA imbalances most often show up as deficiencies; however,
some conditions, such as PCOS, can predispose us to high DHEA
levels as well.

DHEA levels naturally start declining in our early thirties, but,
like testosterone, symptoms usually do not appear right away. As
the levels of DHEA and testosterone decline with age, we are at a
greater risk of age-related illnesses. This correlation is so strong that
declining DHEA and testosterone levels are better markers for
tracking the degenerative aging process than any other biological
markers. Since DHEA is primarily produced by the adrenal glands,
its production and release are greatly influenced by stress. Because


of this, I often see DHEA deficiency alongside adrenal fatigue and
cortisol deficiency.

Symptoms of decreasing DHEA concentrations include loss of
muscle tone, difficulty concentrating, increased abdominal fat, and
decreased libido.

Step 1: Diet Support

In addition to the dietary guidelines outlined in the chapter
“Nutrition for Happy Hormones,” people with low DHEA benefit
from a diet high in protein and low in starch and sugar. Caffeine
and alcohol should also be avoided.

Increase Protein

A higher protein diet, particularly of animal proteins, has been
shown to increase DHEA levels. One thing to keep in mind if
increasing dietary animal protein is to eat as clean as possible. This
means organic, grass-fed, hormone-free, and antibiotic-free animal
meats. Eating a higher protein/lower carbohydrate diet will also
help balance out blood-sugar levels and promote fat loss. Try to
incorporate protein with every meal.

Decrease Caffeine and Other Stimulants

Caffeine and other stimulants trigger the stress response in our
bodies, so if you are already having a hard-enough time dealing
with your everyday stress, these will only add more fuel to the fire.
You need to focus on decreasing stress from all sources: physical,
‘mental /emotional, and dietary.

Decrease Sugar

With every hormonal imbalance, I mention the importance of
decreasing sugar. A low sugar diet is crucial for health. Increased
sugar leads to blood-sugar imbalances, such as diabetes and insulin
resistance, low energy, immune suppression, and an increased risk
of cancer, as well as intestinal problems, behavioral disorders, and
obesity, one of the leading causes of death in the United States. It is
vital to decrease sugar as much as possible.

Step 2: Lifestyle Support

Healthy lifestyle choices are crucial for optimal hormone balance.
Adequate sleep, exercise, and minimal stress are all important for
optimizing adrenal function and DHEA levels.

Decrease Stress

Stress depletes our DHEA levels at a faster rate than normal, so it is
important to find ways in which you can decrease stress. When your
adrenal glands are stressed, they initially produce higher levels of
all adrenal hormones, but over time, they become less sensitive to
this stress and no longer produce adequate amounts (known as
adrenal fatigue). Think of the areas in your life that cause you the
most stress and brainstorm what you can do to decrease this. It may
be looking for a new job, slowing down on nonpersonal and work
commitments, or spending more time doing things you enjoy and
less time doing things you don’t. Meditation is also a great way to
decrease stress, and 1 recommend it for everyone with a DHEA
deficiency.

Exercise
Exercise is very healthy for us, but it is also a form of physical
stress, and if your DHEA levels are low because of concomitant
adrenal fatigue, you are already having a hard-enough time dealing

with daily stressors. I recommend you do exercise, but keep it to the
lighter exercises, such as yoga, pilates, walking, and light weight
lifting.

If your lower DHEA levels are associated more with the aging
process than adrenal fatigue, it is important to include weight-
bearing and strength-building exercises. These types of exercise lead
to increased DHEA and testosterone levels.

Routine
Establishing a routine is important for overall hormonal balance.
Each day of the week, try to wake up and go to bed at the same
time, and eat your meals at the same times. By establishing a
regular routine, your stress response will decrease, your metabolism
will balance out, and you will feel an increase in energy and mood.

Step 3: Nutritional Support

Many of the same supplements recommended for adrenal fatigue
and cortisol deficiency are also useful for increasing DHEA levels.
These include adrenal glandulars, vitamin C, and vitamin E.

Adrenal Glandulars and Extracts

Adrenal glandulars are adrenal supplements made up of actual
adrenal gland tissue, usually from porcine or bovine sources. They
provide your adrenal glands with the raw materials required to
replenish and nourish themselves so they can produce adequate
levels of DHEA and cortisol.

Adrenal Cortex Extracts 250 mg, 2-3 times daily


Vitamin C

Vitamin C is critical for adrenal gland function and recovery. It is a
necessary cofactor for the adrenal cascade (the production of
adrenal hormones from cholesterol in the adrenal glands). Without
vitamin C, your adrenal glands would be unable to keep up with the
hormonal demand, resulting in lower levels of cortisol and DHEA.
Vitamin C also acts as a strong antioxidant and immune booster in
our bodies. If you have lower levels of cortisol and DHEA and are
prone to the common cold, vitamin C is definitely a supplement for
you. Vitamin C can be found in high concentrations in acerola
berries, guava, red chili peppers, green and sweet bell peppers,
grapefruit, watermelon, kiwi, Brussels sprouts, cauliflower, and
broccoli.

Vitamin C 1,000 mg, 2-3 times daily

Vitamin E

Vitamin E, like vitamin C, plays an important role in the production
of adrenal hormones. It is found in the highest concentrations in the
pituitary and adrenal glands and must be present in adequate
amounts in order for your adrenal glands to produce optimal levels
of both DHEA and cortisol. Along with its role in the production of
adrenal hormones, vitamin E is also a strong antioxidant and nerve
and muscle protectant. Vitamin E is found in high concentrations in
almonds, hazelnuts, sunflower seeds, pecans, flaxseed oil, sunflower
and safflower oil, sweet potatoes, and tempeh.

Vitamin E (Mixed Tocopherols) 800 IU daily

Vitamin B5

Vitamin BS is necessary for optimal adrenal function during times of
stress. It is so essential for the synthesis of adrenal hormones that, if
there is a deficiency, your adrenal glands can actually shrink in size.

High concentrations of vitamin BS can be found in chicken and
beef liver, dark poultry meat, brewers yeast, beef, eggs, and brown
rice.

Vitamin BS 500 mg, twice daily

Magnesium
Magnesium, like vitamins C, E, and BS, is essential for optimally
functioning adrenal glands. It is needed for the production of certain
enzymes necessary for the adrenal cascade. Without it, the
production of adrenal hormones, such as DHEA, would be
significantly lower. Food sources of magnesium include brown rice,
beans, nuts and seeds, kelp, Swiss chard, and buckwheat.

Magnesium (Elemental or Citrate) 400 mg daily

Foundation Supplements

I believe that everyone can benefit from three foundational
supplements: a high-quality multivitamin, omega-3 fatty acids, and
vitamin D. A high-quality multivitamin should have the above
mentioned vitamins and minerals in adequate amounts. I've
thoroughly discussed the benefits of these supplements in the
chapter “Nutrition for Happy Hormones,” as I think they should be
part of your daily diet.

Step 4: Herbal Support

Withania somnifera
(Ashwagandha)

Ashwagandha is an extremely important herb for adrenal
imbalances. It is considered an adrenal adaptogen, meaning it can
bring adrenal function back into normal ranges. If your DHEA levels
are too low, ashwagandha will actually work to promote adrenal
hormone production, thereby bringing DHEA levels back into
normal range. Besides acting as an adrenal adaptogen, ashwagandha
also increases energy, strength, endurance, and libido and decreases
inflammation. It is particularly useful in inflammatory conditions,
such as rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis, which are sometimes
associated with low adrenal function.

Ashwagandha (Dried Root) ~~ 600 mg, twice daily

Eleutherococcus senticosus
(Siberian Ginseng)

Siberian ginseng, like ashwagandha, is an adrenal adaptogen. It
improves mental concentration, sustains energy levels and
endurance, and decreases irritability. It often has a very positive
effect on mood. Siberian ginseng is also considered to be an
immune-modulating herb, meaning it will strengthen the immune
system so it is better able to fight off illness. People with adrenal
fatigue, low cortisol, and low DHEA often end up with cold after
cold because of a weakened immune system, and Siberian ginseng is
a great herb to finally put an end to that cold cycle.

Siberian Ginseng (Dried Root) 800 mg, twice daily


Glycyrrhiza glabra
(Licorice Root)

Licorice root is the most well-known herb for adrenal support. It has
been used for centuries in Asia and is found in almost all patented
Chinese herbal formulations. Since licorice has an overall beneficial
effect on the adrenal glands, it can increase the production of all
adrenal hormones, including DHEA.

One thing to mention about licorice is that it can increase blood
pressure in some people, so I suggest monitoring your blood
pressure to make sure it doesn’t rise to an unhealthy level. If you see
your blood pressure rising, simply decrease your dose of licorice or
discontinue it completely.

Licorice Root (Deglycyrrhizinated 500 mg, twice
Standardized Extract) daily

Step 5: Homeopathic Remedies

There are a variety of homeopathic remedies that people with a
DHEA deficiency could benefit from. Please see my recommended
homeopathic remedies in the Appendix.

Step 6: Hormone Replacement Support

Bioidentical DHEA

DHEA supplementation often improves symptoms within two to
three weeks. People notice an increase in energy and concentration,
as well as better sleep and stress resistance. I have also found it to
be beneficial in adrenal fatigue-related insomnia.

DHEA can be converted into testosterone, so it is important to
monitor testosterone levels as well as DHEA levels when
supplementing with it. DHEA can be found in many vitamin stores,
but often the dose is too high, particularly for women. Five to 10 mg
of DHEA are considered to be an appropriate dosage for women,
whereas 25 to 100 mg is suitable for men. DHEA replacement is
covered in more detail in the “Hormone Replacement Therapy”
section in the Appendix.

DHEA Excess

I usually see DHEA excess only in patients taking too high a dose of
exogenous DHEA or in women with polycystic ovarian syndrome. In
some cases, DHEA can be increased in times of acute stress, and if
this is the case, you need to decrease your stress response as much
as you can. Other causes of high DHEA levels include pituitary and
adrenal tumors, as well as Cushing's disease. If you are experiencing
DHEA-excess symptoms and are not currently taking supplemental
DHEA, I recommend you have your levels tested and evaluated by a
health-care practitioner.

Case Example: Claudia, Age 41

Symptoms:
When I first met Claudia, she was experiencing fatigue, brain fog, a
nonexistent libido, and difficulty getting started with work tasks.
She said everything had been gradually getting worse since having
had her first child one year ago. She just had no spark left.

Diagnosis:
Based on her symptoms and lab results, Claudia was experiencing
adrenal fatigue with extremely low levels of DHEA and cortisol. I

also discovered she had an underlying iron and vitamin D
deficiency.

Treatment:

I started Claudia on adrenal extracts, ashwagandha, and a
multivitamin containing sufficient amounts of vitamins E, C, D, and
B, omega 3s, and iron. I also prescribed her a bioidentical DHEA
cream to help boost her DHEA levels. I mentioned to her the
importance of decreasing stress, establishing a routine, and avoiding
any stimulants, such as coffee and black tea.

Results:

After six weeks, Claudia’s energy improved from 4 of 10 to 7 of 10.
She was having an easier time focusing at work and wasn't feeling
so overwhelmed with her tasks. I checked in again six weeks later,
and she was still noticing improvement. The one recommendation
she noticed that had made the most difference was establishing a
routine. She felt more rested and in control when she stuck to her
regular sleeping/waking and eating routines.


CHAPTER 14

Natural Solutions for
Testosterone Deficiency: Low
Libido, Fatigue, and Increased
Body Fat

ESTOSTERONE IS often thought of as a male hormone, but as we

used in the chapter “What Are Hormones and Why Are They
Important?,” testosterone is also essential for women. Testosterone
increases energy, builds bone and muscle mass, reduces fat,
stimulates hair growth, and protects the heart and blood vessels.
With optimal levels, you are better able to deal with stress and
anxiety, as well as maintain an increased sense of self-confidence.
Testosterone imbalances most often show up as deficienci
however, some conditions, such as PCOS, can predispose us to high
testosterone levels as well.

Testosterone naturally starts to decrease in our mid-twenti
however, symptoms do not become noticeable until about the early
forties. Low testosterone levels lead to decreased energy, libido, and
muscle and bone mass, a lack of self assurance, and low mood, as


well as increased fat accumulation and wrinkles. Testosterone
deficiency also contributes to the vaginal dryness and hot flashes
experienced by postmenopausal women.

Step 1: Diet Support

In addition to the dietary guidelines outlined in the chapter
“Nutrition for Happy Hormones,” people with low testosterone
benefit from a diet high in protein and low in starch and sugar.
Caffeine and alcohol should also be avoided.

Increase Protein

A higher protein diet, particularly of animal proteins, has been
shown to increase testosterone levels. One thing to keep in mind if
increasing dietary animal protein is to eat as clean as possible. This
means organic, grass-fed, hormone-free, and antibiotic-free animal
meats. Eating a higher protein/lower carbohydrate diet will also
help balance out blood-sugar levels and promote fat loss. Try to
incorporate protein in every meal.

Decrease Caffeine and Other Stimulants

Caffeine and other stimulants trigger the stress response in our
bodies. This stress response sways our body away from its rest state
to the fight-or-flight response. When our bodies are in this state,
optimal hormonal balance is not a concern.

Decrease Sugar
With every hormonal imbalance, I mention the importance of
decreasing sugar. A low sugar diet is crucial for health. Increased
sugar leads to blood-sugar imbalances, such as diabetes and insulin

resistance, low energy, immune suppression, and an increased risk
of cancer, as well as intestinal problems, behavioral disorders, and
obesity, one of the leading causes of death in the United States. It is
vital to decrease sugar as much as possible.

Step 2: Lifestyle Support

Healthy lifestyle choices are crucial for optimal hormone balance.
Adequate sleep, minimal stress, and exercise are all important for
optimizing testosterone levels.

Decrease Stress

Our bodies function best during times of rest. When our body is
calm, it is able to concentrate on resetting itself back to equilibrium.
‘This means focusing on restoring hormonal, immune, and digestive
balance. It is important to find ways in which you can decrease your
stress. Think of the areas in your life that cause you the most stress
and brainstorm what you can do to decrease this. It may be looking
for a new job, slowing down on nonpersonal and work
commitments, and/or spending more time doing things you enjoy.

Moderate Exercise
Exercise is another important aspect to consider. Many studies have
shown an increase in testosterone levels after exercise. This increase
in testosterone leads to improved muscle mass and definition, as
well as the potential for decreasing fat stores and preventing bone
loss.

Sufficient Sleep

Sufficient sleep is vitally important. You need a good night's rest to
function at an optimal level the next day and to respond to stress
adequately. It is at night while our bodies are at rest when we are
able to focus on hormone production and balance, and if we are not
getting enough sleep during this time, hormones, such as thyroid-
stimulating hormone, testosterone, melatonin, and insulin, will
decrease.

Step 3: Nutritional Support

There are a few different testosterone-supporting vitamins, but zinc
is by far one of the most important.

Zinc
Zine deficiency is correlated with low testosterone levels and
decreased sperm count and motility in men. Testosterone-deficient
men supplemented with zine show increased testosterone levels and
improved sperm counts and motility. Zine is also important because
it prevents the conversion of testosterone into dihydrotestosterone
(DHT), the hormone associated with male pattern baldness and
prostate cancer. All people, including women, taking exogenous
testosterone should ensure optimal zinc levels. Zinc is found in high
concentrations in oysters, beef, turkey, dark, leafy greens, rolled
oats, and pumpkin and sunflower seeds, as well as lentils and beans.

Zinc Picolinate 20-50 mg daily*

“Can interfere with copper absorption; take 2 mg of copper for every 20 mg of sine

Foundation Supplements

I believe that everyone can benefit from three foundational
supplements: a high-quality multivitamin, omega-3 fatty acids, and
vitamin D. A high-quality multivitamin should have the
abovementioned vitamins and minerals in adequate amounts. I have
thoroughly discussed the benefits of these supplements in the
chapter “Nutrition for Happy Hormones,” as I think they should be
part of your daily diet.

Step 4: Herbal Support

Panax Ginseng
(Korean Ginseng)

Korean ginseng is an energizing herb with beneficial effects on
cortisol and testosterone. It has been shown to increase the levels of
both total and free testosterone, as well as cortisol. Korean ginseng
leads to improved male fertility and sperm count and an increased
ability to deal with acute stress. It also promotes an overall
improvement in energy, libido, and endurance.

Korean Ginseng 200-400 mg daily

Tribulus terrestris
(Tribulus)

Tribulus is an herb with known androgen effects. It has been used
for infertility for hundreds of years with much success. Tribulus
contains phytochemicals called steroidal saponins, which have been
shown to increase testosterone levels. It is thought that these
saponins contribute to increased testosterone levels by inducing

luteinizing hormone in the body. This is a great herb for both men
and women experiencing low testosterone and/or infertility.

Tribulus (Standardized Extract) 200-400 mg daily

Serenoa repens
(Saw Palmetto)

Saw palmetto is considered to be a male tonic, as it generally
supports the male reproductive and urinary systems. Saw palmetto
doesn't directly increase testosterone levels, but instead prevents the
conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone (DHT), the
hormone known to promote the growth of the prostate gland. DHT

implicated in benign prostate hyperplasia and prostate cancer.
Saw palmetto combined with zinc significantly decreases this
conversion and is beneficial for anyone (men and women) taking
exogenous testosterone, as well as for men with an increased risk of
prostate cancer.

Saw Palmetto (Berry) Extract 320 mg daily

Step 5: Homeopathic Remedies

There are a variety of homeopathic remedies that people with
testosterone deficiency could benefit from. Please see my
recommended homeopathic remedies in the Appendix.

Step 6: Hormone Replacement Support

Bioidentical Testosterone

Many men and women are prescribed bioidentical testosterone
during menopause and andropause. Men are prescribed much higher
doses than women, with women using about 1/10 of the dose for
men. It is important to be aware of testosterone-excess symptoms
when taking bioidentical testosterone, as those symptoms indicate
too high of a dose. Excess body odor, greasy hair, increased acne,
and/or aggression are signs of excess testosterone.

Bioidentical testosterone is available in a few different forms:
transdermal gels, oral tablets, sublingual troches, and injections. It is
best to avoid oral formulations of testosterone, as the majority of it
will be excreted in the urine. Testosterone replacement is covered in
more detail in the “Hormone Replacement Therapy” section in the
Appendi

BIOIDENTICAL TESTOSTERONE REPLACEMENT

Compounded bioidentical testosterone available
in individualized doses as transdermal gels and
patches, oral tablets, sublingual troches, and
injections

AndroGel® | Brand name for bioidentical testosterone gel

Testosterone,

Bioidentical DHEA

DHEA can be converted into testosterone, so, in some cases, DHEA
is prescribed with the anticipation that it will increase testosterone
levels. I have seen this work quite well for women, but for some
reason, DHEA doesn’t lead to increased testosterone concentrations
in men.

DHEA is considered an over-the-counter medicine in the United
States and can be bought in many vitamin stores. However, the dose
found in the vitamin-store DHEA supplements is usually too high,
particularly for women. Five to 10 mg of DHEA is considered an
appropriate dose for women, whereas 25 to 100 mg is suitable for

men. DHEA replacement is covered in more detail in the “Hormone
Replacement Therapy” section in the Appendix.

Testosterone Excess

I typically see testosterone excess only in patients taking too high a
dose of exogenous testosterone or in women with polycystic ovarian
syndrome (PCOS). Other causes of high testosterone levels include
pituitary and adrenal tumors or tumors and cysts of the testes and
ovaries. If you are experiencing testosterone-excess symptoms and
are not currently taking exogenous testosterone, I recommend you
have your levels tested and evaluated by a health-care practitioner.

Case Example: Julie, Age 40

Symptoms:
Julie came to my practice specifically seeking bioidentical hormone
replacement therapy. She explained that she worked as a personal
trainer and had always lived a very healthy, active life. However,
during the last two years, no matter what she did, she was not
seeing any results from diet and exercise. Her muscle definition was
disappearing and being replaced by fat, even though she was active
with her clients every day. She thought she had low testosterone
levels. Julie was also noticing that her sleep was becoming disturbed
and not as restful. She was following a diet similar to the paleo diet,
with decreased grains and increased animal protein and vegetables.

Diagnosis:
Based on Julie's symptoms and lab results, we discovered she indeed
had low testosterone, along with a progesterone deficiency.

Treatment:

I started Julie on a higher protein diet accompanied by an amino
acid formula, a high-quality multivitamin, omega-3s, Vitex agnus-
castus (chaste-tree berry), and low dose, bioidentical testosterone
and progesterone (oral progesterone to help with sleep). I also
advised her to increase weight-bearing exercises.

Results:

After six weeks, Julie said her sleep and energy had improved, and
she hadn't gained any weight. I retested her testosterone and
progesterone levels, and they had come into the optimal range.

I checked in with Julie another six weeks later, and she said her
sleep and energy levels were still improved and she was beginning
to notice an improvement in her muscle definition. Her muscles
didn't feel as flabby as they used to.

Putting It All Together

CHAPTER 15

Getting Started with Happy
Hormones

Toe cHAPTER is all about helping you get started on your path to
py hormones. In the previous chapters, you learned how diet
and lifestyle affect hormonal imbalance, and you also discovered
what hormonal imbalances may be affecting you and what
treatment protocol would work best for those imbalances. All this
new knowledge may feel overwhelming, and you may not know
where to begin, so to help you out, I have written this getting-
started guide.

It is important to start with an outline:

1. Get organized.

2. Get started on diet and lifestyle suggestions described in the
previous chapters.

3. Begin with the foundation supplements: a high-quality
‘multivitamin, omega-3 fatty acids, and vitamin D.

4. Clean up your environment and personal hygiene products to
decrease your exposure to harmful endocrine disruptors.

5. Book an appointment with a naturopathic doctor who is
knowledgeable in hormone balancing and bioidentical hormone
replacement therapy. Explain your questionnaire results and
symptoms and suggest the testing you would like to have done.

6. Have lab tests done to check your nutrient status and hormone
levels. If your doctor is not on board with testing your
hormones, refer to the Appendix for a list of labs offering home
testing.

7. Begin with your hormone-specific Happy Hormones treatment
program.

8. Regularly repeat lab testing and reflect on your symptoms to
‘monitor your improvement.

Get Organized

Reread the parts of this book that were the most meaningful for you,
and then write out your plan, time line, and goals. By writing these
things down, you will be more likely to move forward and achieve
your end goal of balanced hormones, increased energy, decreased
PMS, or whatever else it may be. I suggest posting this plan in an
obvious place where you will see it every day, such as on the
refrigerator, near your work desk, or on your nightstand.

As part of getting organized, I also suggest making some time for
yourself. By allowing yourself this “me time,” you can nourish your
mind and spirit. Reserve some time to do whatever makes you feel
happy and alive, whether it is going for a walk in nature, getting
together with your friends, or hitting the gym.

Begin Some of the Lifestyle Suggestions

Decreasing stress, getting adequate sleep, establishing a routine, and
exercising regularly are the most important lifestyle contributors to
happy hormones.

Decrease Stress
Think of the areas in your life that cause you the most stress and
brainstorm what you can do to decrease this. Sometimes it means
slowing down on personal and work commitments, learning how to
ask for help, saying no to unnecessary activities and unrealistic
requests, or taking up meditation or yoga. Take some time to think
about this and do what you can to decrease stress in your life.

Get Sleep
Adequate sleep is something we all need in order to function at our
best. If you are not getting enough sleep, your body and mind are
not running at their full capacity, which hinders your response to
stress. If you are having difficulty with insomnia, seek out a
naturopathic doctor to help you restore your natural sleep cycle so
You can get a restful night's sleep.

Establish a Routine

Our bodies love routine. The best way to establish routine is to go to
bed and wake up at the same times every day and to eat at specific
times during the day. This doesn’t have to be at precisely the same
time every day, but if you could keep it within 30 minutes, that is
best. After doing this for a couple of weeks, you will start to notice
that you get hungry at the same times every day, you will start
yawning at a particular time before bed, and you will even wake up
without an alarm clock. You will also notice a more consistent
energy level and mood.

Exercise

Exercise is extremely important for health, but keep in mind that
frequent and intense exercise can contribute to hormonal
imbalances and low energy. If you haven't exercised for a long time,
1 suggest working yourself up slowly by listening to your body and
knowing when you've reached your limit. Just walking for 30
‘minutes per day has shown significant results in decreasing the risk
of cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and many different cancers.

If stress is a constant element in your life, it may be beneficial to
participate in some meditation and yoga classes, as both of these
types of exercise are incredibly effective at decreasing stress. For
those of you going through menopause or andropause, always
include weight-bearing exercise in your fitness program to help
‘maintain optimal bone and muscle mass.

Clean Up Your Diet

Diet affects not only hormonal health, but also cardiovascular,
immune, and metabolic health. Focus on a diet high in vegetables,
healthy fats and oils, and lean protein and low in packaged,
processed sugary foods. From this point on, try to avoid buying
anything that comes already prepared in a package or box. If it
contains high fructose corn syrup, leave it on the shelf! An e:
to get started with these changes is to combine the nutrition
program outlined in the chapter “Nutrition for Happy Hormones”
with the recipe collection located in the Appendix. You can also
access extra recipes on my website, www. dr-kristy.com.

Begin with Foundation Supplements

Get started on the Happy Hormones foundation supplements: a
high-quality multivitamin, omega-3s, and vitamin D. A high-quality
multivitamin will supply the necessary cofactors for liver


detoxification and hormone and energy production. Omega-3s are
essential for hormone synthesis, while also maintaining healthy
nerves and cell membranes and decreasing our risk of inflammatory
disorders, cardiovascular disease, and diabetes. Vitamin D is vital
not only for optimal hormone function; it also acts as a powerful
antioxidant and cancer preventative, increases mood, and helps
‘maintain bone mass. These three supplements are the foundations of
the nutritional supplement program. Visit wwuw.dr-kristy.com for
‘more information on these supplements.

Clean Up Your Environment

To decrease your exposure to endocrine disruptors, I suggest
replacing conventional cleaning supplies with natural cleaners,
avoiding plastics, drinking filtered water, and buying an air purifier
for your home.

Conventional cleaning supplies contain many chemicals harmful
to our health. Some contain known carcinogens (cancer-causing
substances), while others contain chemicals that act as endocrine
disruptors in our bodies. Check out the Environmental Working
Group (wwiw.ewg.org) for a list of clean, toxin-free cleaners.

As we leaned in previous chapters, plastics contain chemicals
that mimic estrogen in our bodies, potentially leading to an
estrogen-excess imbalance. I strongly suggest you avoid heating and
storing your food or drinks in plastic containers and that you
replace your plastic water bottles with glass or stainless-steel
bottles. I also recommend that, instead of drinking bottled water,
you switch to filtered tap water. There are a few different types of
filters for home use, including reverse osmosis systems, activated
carbon, sediment, and kinetic degradation fluxion filters.

Another thing to keep in mind is your air quality at home and
work. We spend about 80 percent of our time indoors, so it is
important to ensure we are not breathing in too many harmful
chemicals. Air fresheners, carpet, paint, perfumes, and furniture all
release harmful chemicals into the air we breathe. By using a HEPA


(high efficiency particulate air) filter, a large majority of these
toxins are filtered out, allowing you to breathe in cleaner, healthier
air.

Book an Appointment with a Naturopathic
Doctor Knowledgeable in Hormone
Balancing

It is important to work with a health-care practitioner during your
hormonal-balancing program. They can work with you to monitor
your symptoms and hormone levels and can prescribe bioidentical
hormones if necessary. I know we all like to try treating ourselves at
first, and this is fine in the lifestyle and diet arena, but to ensure
‘maximal improvement and success, it is best to work with a doctor
knowledgeable in nutritional supplementation and bioidentical
hormone replacement therapy.

‘When you go in for your initial visit, bring in your questionnaire
and a list of the lab tests you would like to have done. It is
important you find a doctor who is willing to listen to your concerns
and work with you to balance your hormones in a safe, natural way.

Lab Testing

Review the recommended lab tests found in the hormone diagnosis
chapters to help you determine which tests may be best suited for
you. If you would like to order the tests yourself, check out the
Appendix for a list of labs offering nondoctor-ordered hormone
tests.

Begin the Hormonal-Balancing Program
Specific to You

Work with your new naturopathic doctor, who is knowledgeable in
hormonal balancing, to get started on your comprehensive
hormonal-balancing program. Remember that it is best to start with
the diet and lifestyle recommendations before adding in some of the
suggested nutritional supplements, herbs, homeopathics, and
hormone replacement therapy. Also keep in mind that our hormones
all influence each other and that, more often than not, a few
different hormones will have to be balanced at the same time.

Repeat Lab Tests

If you and your doctor decide that hormone replacement therapy is
an option for you, remember to have follow-up lab testing four to
six weeks after starting the therapy, and then every three months for
the first year to ensure appropriate dosing and optimal results. Also,
keep in mind that achieving hormonal balance is a comprehensive
process and will not happen overnight. It will take effort and
commitment, but I promise it will be worth it in the end. I
recommend dedicating a full three months to this Happy Hormones
program to achieve optimal results.

PART 5

Appendix

APPENDIX A:

Hormone Replacement Therapy

Hoes REPLACEMENT therapy was traditionally used to relieve
toms associated with menopause, such as osteoporosis, hot
flashes, insomnia, and vaginal dryness. Nowadays it is also being
used in all stages of life if there is indeed a hormonal deficiency that
needs extra support. Hormone replacement therapy can be
particularly useful in PMS, hypothyroidism, adrenal fatigue, and for
the prevention of miscarriages. Additionally, it is also being used in
a preventative sense to slow the aging process and prevent the
conditions and symptoms associated with aging.

As we already know, hormones protect our cardiovascular system,
boost brain function, maintain bone and muscle mass, and fight off
illness, infections, and inflammation. By replacing suboptimal levels
of hormones, you decrease your risk of bone loss, infections, and
chronic diseases, such as diabetes, arthritis, and cardiovascular
disease. Having balanced hormones helps you age as healthy and
energetically as possible.

One thing to remember about hormone therapy is that every
person is different and needs to be treated as such. One of your
friends may be receiving estrogen and testosterone replacement, but
that doesn’t mean you also need those, even if your symptoms are


the same. For example, your symptoms of insomnia may be coming
from a lack of progesterone, while your friend may have a cortisol
imbalance.

There are many benefits to hormone replacement therapy, but
remember that, like with many medicines, there can be risks
involved. Be sure that you are taking the hormones in the safest
manner possible and that your hormone levels are being monitored
by a health professional knowledgeable in bioidentical hormone
replacement therapy (BHRT). In this chapter, I hope to arm you
with the necessary information so you can choose the safest
treatment option specifically for you.

Synthetic versus Bioidentical Hormones

The naming of bioidentical and synthetic hormones can be a bit
confusing, since both the bioidentical and synthetic hormones are
synthesized from natural sources. The primary difference between
the two is that bioidentical hormones have the exact same
‘molecular makeup and structure as our own hormones and synthetic
do not. A better name for synthetic hormones might be
nonbioidentical, but for simplicity sake, we will continue referring
to them as synthetic.

Bioidentical hormones have more benefits and less risks in
comparison to synthetic hormones. Because bioidentical hormones
have the same structure as our human hormones, they bind with the
same receptors and elicit the same actions as human hormones.
Synthetic hormones, on the other hand, do not bind completely with
our body's receptors, resulting in an altered response and possible
side effects. This can be compared to a key-and-lock model.
Bioidentical hormones act as the key, fitting precisely with our cell
receptors and fully opening the lock. When synthetic hormones try
binding with our cell receptors, they do not quite fit and the lock
doesn’t fully open. This semi-opened lock will elicit a different
response compared to the fully open lock seen with bioidentical
hormones.


Another benefit of bioidentical versus synthetic hormones is that
bioidenticals can be compounded for each individual, ensuring that
you get an appropriate dose for your specific hormone levels,
Symptoms, and health status. Bioidentical hormones are also
available in many different formulations: oral, transdermal,
sublingual, and injectable. Synthetic hormones, on the other hand,
come in preset doses, which are usually too high and are most often
formulated as oral tablets or pills. Hormones taken orally must be
processed through the liver before being absorbed into our blood
stream, and when these hormones pass through the liver, (in
particular estrogen), harmful by-products, such as clotting factors,
binding proteins, and pro-inflammatory hormones, are formed.
‘These by-products increase the risk of blood clots, heart disease, and
strokes, as well as weight gain, sexual dysfunction, headaches, and
elevations in blood pressure, triglycerides, and cholesterol.

This combination of high dosages, nonidentical molecular
structure, and oral formulations are the primary reasons synthetic
hormones have so many side effects. It is estimated that about half
of women stop their synthetic hormones due to these side effects.

The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute’s Women’s Health
Initiative, a 15-year-long study launched in 1991, examined the use
of synthetic estrogen and synthetic progesterone in 161,000
postmenopausal women. The results were so astounding that the
study had to be stopped early because of side effects. Women taking
these synthetic hormones showed an increased risk of breast and
ovarian cancers, heart disease, and strokes. The cause of these side
effects was a bit blurry, but researchers suspect it was a combination
of the use of oral estrogens, too high of doses, and the fact that both
the estrogen and progesterone were synthetic and didn't structurally
match our human equivalent. This study is a primary reason the use
of hormone replacement therapy is considered risky and unsafe. The
good news is that bioidentical hormones, when prescribed
appropriately, possess none of these features and are not only
extremely effective at low doses, but are also significantly safer than
synthetic hormones. Bioidentical hormones are also associated with


lower risks of breast cancer and cardiovascular disease and are more

efficacious than their synthetic counterparts.
Bioidentical Synthetic
|__ Hormones Hormones
Identical to human
Yes No
hormones |
Allow for individual Yes No
dosing \
Significantly fewer side | y No
effects
Synthetic Estrogen

Synthetic estrogens are a group of patented estrogen formulations
that have a different molecular makeup and structure from our
human estrogen. There are a few different types, but the most
commonly prescribed synthetic estrogen and the one involved in the
Women’s Health Initiative study is called Premarin®. Premarin is a
mixture of conjugated equine (horse) estrogens with estrone. There
are three important facts to consider with Premarin:

Estrone is already present in high levels during menopause and is
something you don’t need in excess. Estrone and its metabolites are
associated with increased growth of breast and uterine tissue.
Humans are not designed to break down horse estrogen; we are
designed to metabolize our own human estrogens. The horse
estrogen can stay in the body for a longer period of time, leading to
potential side effects.

Synthetic hormones are formulated as oral tablets. When estrogen
is taken orally, it is metabolized by the liver, resulting in harmful
by-products, such as clotting factors, binding proteins, and pro-
inflammatory molecules.

While synthetic estrogens have these side effects, bioidentical
estrogens do not. When prescribed for the individual in low dosages


and appropriately monitored with lab testing, bioidentical hormones
have significantly fewer side effects.

Synthetic (Non-Bioidentical) Estrogen Formulations
Premarin® |Femtrace®
Cenestin® Menest®
Enjuvia® Ortho-Est®

Bioidentical Estrogen Formulations
Estradiol [Estrace®
Estriol |Gynodiol®
Bi-estrogen Vivelle-Dot®
Tri-estrogen

Synthetic Progesterone

Synthetic progesterone is often classified as progestin. Like estrogen,
synthetic progesterone has a different molecular makeup and does
not fit the same receptor sites as our human progesterone. In the
Women’s Health Initiative study, the synthetic progesterone,
Provera®, was associated with increased blood clotting, weight gain,
and an increased risk of breast cancer. It has been shown to increase
Creactive protein (a marker of inflammation) and constrict our
blood vessels, and is harmful during pregnancy. It is no wonder that
hormone replacement therapy has had such a bad reputation. The
good news is that, like bioidentical estrogen, bioidentical
progesterone is considerably safer than synthetic progesterone. In
some instances, it actually has the opposite effect as the synthetic
progestins.

Synthetic (Non-Bioidentical) Progesterone Formulations

Provera® [Curretab®
Cycrin® | Aygestin®
Amen®

Bioidentical Progesterone Formulations

Progesterone

Prometrium®

Bioidentical Synthetic Progesterone
Progesterone (Progestin)

Heart attack pe reaed Increased

risk |
Stroke risk | Decreased Increased
Breast cancer Decreased Increased

risk
Vaginal Decreased Increased

bleeding

Bioidentical Hormone Benefits

Both synthetic and bioidentical hormones can have a positive effect

on the symptoms of menopause and andropause.

However,

bioidentical hormones, when prescribed appropriately, come with

less

. They have been shown to:

+ Reduce hot flashes, night sweats, and vaginal dryness and

thinning

+ Prevent osteoporosis

+ Maintain greater muscle mass and strength

* Protect against heart attacks and strokes

+ Improve blood-cholesterol levels

+ Reduce the risks of uterine and breast cancers

+ Reduce the risk of depression

+ Improve sleep, mood, concentration, and memory

+ Prevent senility and Alzheimer’s disease

+ Enhance libido/sex drive

How to Use Bioidentical Hormones

Research has shown that bioidentical hormones have significantly
less risks than synthetic hormones when they are prescribed
appropriately: transdermal (in most cases) in low doses and fitted
for the individual.

Bioidentical hormones can be prescribed in various forms,
including sublingual, oral, and transdermal, as creams, gels, and
patches. We have already learned that oral formulations can lead to
unwanted by-products when they are metabolized in the liver. One
such unwanted metabolite produced from oral estrogen is called
estrone sulfate, which has been associated with an increased risk of
endometrial and breast cancer. Transdermal absorption allows the
hormones to bypass the liver, thus preventing the harmful unwanted
liver metabolites and closely mimicking the rate and rhythm that
our bodies naturally produce and release hormones.

Skin creams and gels are what I most often prescribe because they
allow for individual dosing, prolonged absorption, and the
avoidance of the liver pathways. However, with creams and gels,
compliance can sometimes be an issue. Some people find it takes
more effort and time to apply transdermal creams than to swallow a
pill. Another aspect to consider with transdermal application is the
possibility of hormone buildup and storage. Some hormones, such as
estrogen, are stored in our fat cells, and in some women,
transdermal applications can actually promote this storage. This is
just another reason why it is important to have follow-up lab testing
with a health-care practitioner knowledgeable in hormone
replacement therapy. Transdermal patches are also an option as
they allow for high compliancy. The disadvantage is that they come
in preset dosages and ratios, so they are difficult to adjust for each
individual

Bioidentical hormones are available for many different hormones,
including estrogen, progesterone, DHEA, testosterone, cortisol,
pregnenolone, and growth hormone. When using bioidentical
hormones, it is important to remember that all of the hormones


work together and influence each other. Because of this, you must
take into consideration your overall hormonal balance and balance
the hormones together rather than just working on one hormone.
Before starting on a program of bioidentical hormone replacement
therapy, it is necessary to have your hormone levels tested to
establish a baseline from which your levels and dose can be
‘monitored and compared. It is important to discuss your individual
symptoms, risks, and health goals with a knowledgeable health-care
practitioner to ensure bioidentical hormone replacement is an
appropriate line of treatment for you. There is risk with everything,
but if dosed appropriately and monitored properly, bioidentical
hormones are an excellent option to restore deficient hormones.

Bioidentical Estrogen

Bioidentical estrogen is most often prescribed in postmenopausal
women to relieve symptoms of hot flashes, night sweats, and
memory loss, as well as to prevent osteoporosis. Some
premenopausal women may also need extra estrogen support if, for
example, they are having irregular menstrual cycles or a complete
absence of their menstrual period. Most women who begin
bioidentical estrogen replacement therapy feel almost immediate
relief from their hot flashes, night sweats, and irritability. It is
important, however, to watch for signs of excess dosing, such as
heavy periods, tender and swollen breasts, and/or irritability when
taking estrogen replacement. If you have these symptoms, it means
your dose is too high and needs to be decreased. In addition, women
with a personal or family history of estrogen-associated breast or
uterine cancer must be monitored closely when using bioidentical
estrogen therapy, as estrogen normally increases the growth of these
tissues. To help offset this effect, it is important to take bioidentical
progesterone along with the estrogen. Progesterone opposes the
effect estrogen has on breast and uterine tissue, thus decreasing the
risk of estrogen-related breast and uterine cancer.


Formulations

Bioidentical estrogen can be prescribed in a variety of formulations
and delivery methods. I strongly urge you to avoid oral
formulations, as they lead to unwanted and potentially harmful by-
products when metabolized by the liver. Transdermal and
sublingual are considered to be the safest delivery methods for
estrogen.

Formulations not only vary in the delivery form, but also in the
type of estrogen. Some contain only estradiol, some a combination
of estriol and estradiol, and others a combination of estriol,
estradiol, and estrone. Remember that postmenopausal women
usually have enough estrone, so it is often better to choose a
formulation without this particular estrogen. If osteoporosis is a
concern, a formulation containing estradiol is important, as estradiol
is the estrogen that helps block the breakdown of bone tissue. See
the table on the following page for the most common bioidentical
estrogen formulations.

BIOIDENTICAL ESTROGEN FORMULAS
Transdermal Creams and| Transdermal

Oral Gels Patches

’ ; Alora®
Estradiol Estradiol diol
. . Estraderm®
Estriol Estriol (Estradiol)
Bi-estrogen (Estradiol Bi-estrogen (Estradiol |Vivelle-Dot®®
and Estriol) and Estriol) (Estradiol)

Tri-estrogen (Estradiol,  Tri-estrogen (Estradiol, |Esclim®
Estriol, and Estrone) Estriol, and Estrone) (Estradiol)

Estrace® (Estradiol) | Divigel® (Estradiol) eel)
. . Climara®®
® (Est ® (stra
Gynodiol® (Estradiol) | EstroGel® (Estradiol) (Estradiol)

Elestrin® (Estradiol)


Important Things to Remember

+ Bioidentical estrogen should be prescribed at the lowest effective
dose and for the shortest time necessary as consistent with the
treatment goals of, and risks to, the individual

* Estrogen should always be combined with bioidentical
progesterone

+ Never take oral estrogens

+ Monitor for estrogen-excess symptoms and modify dose as
needed

Bioidentical Progesterone

Bioidentical progesterone, like estrogen, is most often prescribed to
relieve the symptoms of menopause. However, I also prescribe it to
help regulate the menstrual cycle, decrease the risk of miscarriage,
and resolve symptoms of PMS, insomnia, and anxiety. With the
increasing occurrence of estrogen dominance, I am seeing more and
more premenopausal symptoms with progesterone-deficiency
symptoms.

It is important to cycle progesterone in premenopausal women so
their menstrual cycle stays on track. Progesterone is used during the
second phase of the menstrual cycle (days 14-28). Like with
estrogen, it is important to monitor for symptoms of excess
progesterone and adjust the dose if necessary. Increased weight
gain, sleepiness, low libido, and low mood are signs of excess
progesterone. As with estrogen therapy, women with a history of
progesterone-related breast cancer should be monitored closely by a
knowledgeable health-care practitioner.

Formulations

Progesterone is available in a variety of formulas and delivery
methods. It is one hormone that can be taken orally, as it doesn't
lead to the production of harmful metabolites through liver
metabolism. Oral progesterone is particularly useful for women
experiencing insomnia, as it decreases anxiety and promotes sleep.
See the table below for the most common bioidentical progesterone
formulations.

BIOIDENTICAL PROGESTERONE FORMULATIONS
Oral Transdermal Creams and Gels
Progesterone Progesterone
Prometrium®

Bioidentical Testosterone

Bioidentical testosterone is commonly prescribed for men and
women experiencing symptoms of andropause and menopause
respectively. The dose for men is much higher than that for women,
as women naturally have significantly lower levels of testosterone. I
generally prescribe bioidentical testosterone more for men than for
women, as women’s testosterone levels often improve with DHEA
supplementation.

Men and women taking bioidentical testosterone often notice
increased libido, energy, and muscle strength, as well as increased
confidence and self-assurance. Testosterone may also decrease
abdominal fat stores.

Formulations
Like estrogen and progesterone, bioidentical testosterone is
available in different delivery methods and formulations. It can be
prescribed as sublingual pouches, injectables, oral tablets, or
transdermal patches and creams. It is best to avoid oral
formulations, as a large majority of oral testosterone is lost in the

urine. Synthetic testosterone does exist, but should not be used, as it
does not exactly mimic the effects of our human testosterone and
has been linked with liver cancer.

When taking testosterone, it is important to monitor for excess
symptoms, such as aggression and increased body hair and odor, as
well as greasy hair and skin. If you have these symptoms, your dose
should be decreased.

Another important fact to consider with testosterone replacement
is testosterone’s ability to be converted into estrogen and
dihydrotestosterone (DHT). Some people rapidly convert
testosterone into estrogen and/or dihydrotestosterone, so it is also
important to monitor estrogen and dihydrotestosterone levels along
with testosterone. See the table below for the most common
bioidentical testosterone formulations.

BIOIDENTICAL TESTOSTERONE FORMULATIONS

Transdermal
Transdermal

Oral Creamsand Injectable
Patches
Gels
Testosterone | Testosterone | Testosterone | Androderm”
AndroGel"

Fortesta

Bioidentical Cortisol

In my practice, I sometimes prescribe bioidentical cortisol for those
who are incredibly tired and suffering from adrenal fatigue and
cortisol deficiency. In some cases, no matter how many herbs,
vitamins, or extracts I give a patient, only the bioidentical cortisol
will achieve results in the beginning. Of course, when considering

adrenal fatigue, it's also important to decrease stress to an absolute
‘minimum and adapt healthy sleep and eating patterns.

Bioidentical cortisol can increase concentration and mood, while
decreasing foggy mind, irritability, and anxiety. When taking
bioidentical cortisol, your symptoms and cortisol levels must be
closely monitored by a knowledgeable health-care practitioner, as
too much cortisol can lead to unwanted side effects. Excess
symptoms can include a bloated face, increased abdominal fat,
anxiety and stress, and/or thinning skin. Bioidentical cortisol
supplementation, for the treatment of adrenal fatigue, should not
exceed 20 mg per day.

It is important to mimic your body's natural release of cortisol to
prevent any imbalances with your circadian rhythm. Our bodies
release cortisol in higher concentrations in the morning and in lower
concentrations throughout the afternoon, evening, and night.

Formulations

See the table below for the most common bioidentical cortisol
formulations.

BIOIDENTICAL CORTISOL FORMULATIONS
Oral Transdermal Creams and Gels
Cortef® Hydrocortisone

Bioidentical Dehydroepiandrosterone
(DHEA)

Bioidentical DHEA is prescribed for both men and women; however,
the dose for women is significantly lower than for men. Low DHEA
levels are associated with menopause, andropause, smoking, stress,
aging, and adrenal fatigue. In my practice, I most commonly
prescribe DHEA during menopause and adrenal fatigue.


DHEA supplementation can result in increased energy, mood,
libido, and concentration, as well as decreased anxiety and
irritability. While taking DHEA, it is important to watch out for
excess symptoms of increased facial hair, acne, and greasy hair.

Formulations

Like the other bioidentical hormones, DHEA is available in
different formulations and delivery methods. It is one of the
hormones that is available without a prescription, often in oral
formulations. However, even though it is available over the counter,
it is important to have a knowledgeable health-care practitioner
monitor your dose and progress. Sublingual and transdermal
formulations are recommended over oral formulations. See the table
below for the most common bioidentical DHEA formulations.

BIOIDENTICAL DHEA FORMULATIONS
Oral Transdermal Creams and Gels
DHEA | DHEA

Thyroid Hormone Support

Thyroid hormones are often prescribed for anyone experiencing
hypothyroid symptoms, such as weight gain, fatigue, dry skin, and
low mood. Most doctors prescribe levothyroxine (T4); however,
many hypothyroid patients have trouble converting this T4 into the
active hormone triiodothyronine (T3). Because of this, it is often
beneficial to include small doses of T3 to ensure optimal results.
When taking thyroid hormones, it is important to start with a low
dose and slowly work your way up every 10 days. It is important to
monitor yourself for excess symptoms, such as heart palpitations,
increased pulse and sweating, talking fast, increased thirst and
appetite, and over-the-top energy. If you feel these symptoms, you


need to decrease your dose and have your thyroid lab values
reevaluated.

Formulations

‘Thyroid hormones are available in a few different oral formulations.
Some are derived from porcine glandulars, while others are strictly
T4 and T3 preparations. There is some confusion over which of
these thyroid formulas are synthetic and which are natural and/or
bioidentical. The natural porcine-derived thyroid preparations
contain bioidentical T4 and T3, with the addition of T1 and T2
thyroid hormones and some other nutrients necessary for optimal
thyroid function. Synthetic preparations, such as synthroid and
cytomel, also contain bioidentical T4 and T3, but are missing the
extra benefits of T1 and T2.

1 generally prefer the natural thyroid preparations, as they contain
both T4 and T3, as well as other nutrients normally present in
healthy thyroid glands. Even though the majority of my patients do
very well with the natural preparations, some patients have trouble
with the higher T3 to T4 ratio found in these formulas.

‘Thyroid dosing is very individual, and some people respond better
to the natural porcine-derived formulations, while others respond
better to the T4 or T3 only formulations. See the table on the
following page for the most common thyroid hormone formulations.

THYROID HORMONE FORMULATIONS (ORAL)
Formulation

Armour Porcine glandular containing levothyroxine (T4)
Thyroid® | and triiodothyronine (T3)
Nature- Porcine glandular containing levothyroxine (T4)

Throid® | and triiodothyronine (T3)

Porcine glandular containing levothyroxine (T4)
and triiodothyronine (T3)

Cytomel® _ Contains triiodothyronine (T3)

Westhroid™


Liothyronine Contains triiodothyronine (T3)
Synthroid® | Contains levothyroxine (T4)
Levothroid® | Contains levothyroxine (T4)
Levoxyl® | Contains levothyroxine (T4)
Contains fixed ratios of levothyroxine (T4) and
Thyrolar® | jiodothyronine (T3)

Summary

Bioidentical hormone replacement therapy has many benefits and
can significantly reduce the risk of age-related illnesses such as
cardiovascular disease and cancer. Not only can it reduce the risk of
illness, but it also can result in increased energy levels, mood, and
libido and an overall sense of wellness. Many of my patients tell me
how young they look and feel compared to their friends of the same
age, and I can see it on the inside by monitoring their blood values.
But like many therapies, if bioidentical hormone replacement is
not appropriately prescribed and monitored, some side effects and
risks may occur. To ensure you get the optimal results and to
decrease any risks, it is important to follow these guidelines:

+ Copy nature

+ Use the exact molecular duplicates of the human hormones in
similar quantities normally found in our bodies

+ Remember it is best to take estrogen and testosterone as
transdermal preparations (or sublingual if poor transdermal
absorption)

+ Monitor hormone levels regularly

+ Work with a doctor knowledgeable in bioidentical hormone
replacement therapy

+ Knowledgeable doctors can evaluate your hormone levels and
your individual risk, as well as modify your dosages if necessary

to ensure optimal results and success

+ Remember all our hormones work together and, together, they
‘must be balanced

APPENDIX B:

Specialty Labs for Hormone
Self-Testing

He 1s a list of the specialty labs I commonly recommend and
for hormone testing. For the majority of hormone testing, I
recommend blood testing, but in some cases (such as when testing
adrenal function or urinary metabolites), salivary and urinary
testing is also recommended.

Meridian Valley

(www.meridianvalleylab.com)

Meridian Valley specializes in comprehensive, 24-hour urinary
hormone and metabolite testing. They can send the collection test
kits directly to your address.

ZRT Laboratory

(www.zrtlab.com)

ZRT specializes in salivary hormone and blood spot tests. They offer
salivary adrenal and hormone profiles, along with thyroid and
vitamin D blood spot tests.

DirectLabs

(www.directlabs.com)

You can order significantly discounted hormonal blood tests directly
through DirectLabs. This is a great option if your physician is
unwilling to order them for you. All you have to do is order the tests
online, print out the requisition form, and then take that form to
LabCorp (www.labcorp.com) to have your blood drawn. They notify
you by e-mail when the results are in.

Life Extension®

(www.lef.org)

Life Extension is a membership site offering significant savings on
member lab testing. You just have to print out the requisition form
and take it with you to LabCorp to have your blood drawn. Your
results are sent directly to you.


APPENDIX C:

Homeopathic Remedies for
Happy Hormones

Te HOMEOPATHIC remedies shown on the following pages are
e of the most commonly prescribed homeopathics for women
experiencing hormonal imbalances. These constitutional
homeopathics are very individual, and personality and behavioral
traits need to be included with the physical symptoms in order to
find the right remedy for each individual. Homeopathy concentrates
on balancing the whole person, and in order for this to happen, both
body and mind need to be considered.

I recommend working with a homeopathic or naturopathic doctor
who is knowledgeable in homeopathy to help you find the right
remedy for you. Adding the right homeopathic medicines to your
Happy Hormones program can be extremely beneficial, allowing
you to release any negative energy and emotions that may be
holding you back from achieving the best results possible.

Calcarea Carbonica

‘This remedy is sometimes used to help relieve symptoms associated
with low thyroid function. It is generally indicated for overweight,
sedentary people who have a tendency to feel chilly and are often
prone to lymph and circulatory problems, obesity, and constipation.
In addition to its use for low thyroid function, it is also beneficial for
the swelling and water retention associated with PMS.

Ignatia

‘This remedy is useful for hormonal imbalances that come on after
grief. It is generally indicated for women who experience an absence
of menstrual bleeding during grief. Ignatia is often beneficial for
perfectionists who suffer from griefrelated insomnia and feel
irritable and betrayed. Women in need of ignatia frequently sigh to
relieve some of their tension.

Lachesis

‘This is a great remedy for hormonal imbalances. Women in need of
lachesis often experience an immediate improvement in PMS
symptoms, such as headaches (often on the left side), swelling, and
irritability, with the onset of menses (menstrual period). It is also
beneficial for women experiencing hot flashes during menopause. In
terms of personality, lachesis is generally indicated for jealous and
suspicious people who have a tendency to lash out and have a fear
of snakes and a dislike for tight clothing.

Lycopodium
Lycopodium is useful for people experiencing low thyroid function
with accompanying gastrointestinal upset and poor digestion. It is
generally indicated for people with low mood, feelings of insecurity,


apprehension, and menstrual periods that occur late and last too
long.

Natrum Muriaticum

Like the homeopathic remedy ignatia, natrum muriaticum also
benefits women with hormonal imbalances that come on after grief
or disappointed love. It can be used for irregular menstrual cycles,
PMS, and menopausal symptoms. It is generally indicated for
perfectionist women who repress their feelings, are unable to cry,
and feel worse with consolation (at least initially). Natrum
muriaticum works well for women who are reserved, quiet, and very
proper.

Nux-vomica

This remedy is generally indicated for type-A personalities with
stimulant cravings and a sensitivity to light, noise, and odors. This
remedy works well for cortisol, estrogen, and progesterone
imbalances. It is a typical remedy for imbalances due to excesses,
whether it is an excess of food or alcohol, stress, and/or work. These
excesses often result in irritability, headaches, digestive upset, and
bad temper. Nux-vomica also benefits women experiencing irregular
and short menstrual cycles accompanied by painful menstrual
cramps extending to the lower back with a constant urging for a
bowel movement.

Phosphorus

Phosphorus is a great remedy for women having intermittent
spotting during their menstrual cycle and/or menstrual periods that
are heavy and last too long. It is often suited for easygoing,

effervescent women who are sympathetic, extremely friendly,
independent, and prone to respiratory complaints.

Pulsatilla

Pulsailla is a great remedy for women with a mild, gentle, and
yielding disposition. Pulsatilla is generally indicated for hormonal
imbalances resulting in amenorrhea and menstrual periods that are
constantly changing. It is also useful for the irritability and
emotional outbursts often associated with PMS. Women suited to
Pulsatilla often feel better with open air, love, and consolation and
are often emotionally needy.

Sepia

Sepia is indicated in a variety of hormonal imbalances when there
are complaints of iritability and an indifference to others,
particularly loved ones (children and spouse). Sepia works great for
pregnancy complaints, such as morning sickness, PMS, menopause
with night sweating and/or hot flashes, and painful menstrual
periods accompanied by a bearing-down sensation in the pelvis.
Sepia is also indicated for women with varicose veins, vaginal
candida, and skin complaints associated with the menstrual cycle.

Staphysagria

Staphysagria is indicated for a variety of hormonal imbalances,
particularly when there is a history of sexual abuse. It is generally
useful for sweet but suppressed women who frequently try to please
others. They often suppress their anger to the point where they are
ready to explode. Staphysagria is also great for women prone to
pelvic pain and/or genitourinary infections, such as candida, and is


quite helpful in decreasing outbursts and irritability associated with
PMS.

Happy Hormones Recipe
Collection

Vegetarian Omelet
Total prep and cooking time: 25 minutes

Serves 1-2
2 organic eggs
1 handful spinach
1 tomato, diced
Ys small zuc

¥ cup mushrooms, chopped

ini, diced

Pinch salt and pepper

‘Whisk eggs in a small bowl, and then add to a frying pan.

Cook eggs for 2-3 minutes until the eggs begin to set on the bottom
of the pan.

Gently lift the edges of the omelet with a spatula to let the uncooked
part of the eggs flow toward the edges and cook.

Add the spinach, tomato, zucchini, and mushrooms.

Using a spatula, gently fold one edge of the omelet over the
vegetables.

Cook for another 3 minutes.
Slide the omelet out of the skillet and onto a plate.

Cut in half and serve.

Fruit Salad with Pumpkin Seeds
Total prep and cooking time: 10 minutes

Serves 1-2

¥ cup fresh blueberries
¥ cup fresh strawberries
¥ cups fresh bla
¥ cup organic, gluten-free granola
2 tablespoons pumpkin seeds

Kberries

Mix together in a bowl. Serve immediately.

Ginger and Walnut Oatmeal
Total prep and cooking time: 20 minutes

Serves 3

2 cups water
1 cup rolled oats

Y cup raisins

2 teaspoons grated ginger

1 tablespoon sunflower seeds
1 tablespoon walnuts

Salt, to taste

Bring water to a boil.
Add oats, raisins, ginger, and a pinch of salt.
Reduce heat to low.

Continue cooking until water is absorbed and oats become creamy
(about 7 minutes).

Add sunflower seeds and walnuts. Serve immediately.

Bok Choy Breakfast
Total prep and cooking time: 25 minutes

Serves 1

4 big bok choy leaves
1 teaspoon toasted sesame oil
1 tablespoon rice vinegar

1 tablespoon tamari
¥ cup cooked brown rice

Wash bok choy and chop into bite-size pieces.
Heat sesame oil in a sauté pan.
Add bok choy and stir-fry for 1 minute.

and rice.

Add vinegar, tam

Stir gently and continue cooking (about 3 minutes) until everything
is warm.

Transfer to a bowl to eat.

Roasted Tomato Basil Soup

Total prep and cooking time: 1 hour 30 minutes

Serves 6

3 pounds ripe plum tomatoes, cut in quarters
1 tablespoon high-quality olive oil

1 teaspoon sea salt

1 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper

2 yellow onions, chopped

6 cloves garlic, minced

2 tablespoons grapeseed oil

¥ teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes

1(28 02.) can plum tomatoes, with their juice
4 cups fresh basil leaves

1 teaspoon fresh thyme leaves

1 quart vegetable stock or water

Preheat the oven to 400°F.

Toss together the tomatoes, 1 tablespoon olive oil, salt, and pepper.
Spread the tomatoes in 1 layer on a baking sheet and roast for 45

‘minutes.

In an 8-quart stockpot over medium heat, sauté the onions and
garlic with 2 tablespoons grapeseed oil and the red pepper flakes for

10 minutes until the onions start to brown. Add the
tomatoes, basil, thyme, and vegetable stock or water.


Add the oven-roasted tomatoes, including the liquid on the baking
sheet. Bring to a boil and simmer uncovered for 40 minutes.

Taste for seasonings. Serve hot or cold.

Mulligatawny Soup

Total prep and cooking time: 1 hour 15 minutes

Serves 6

3 tablespoons grapeseed oil
1 large onion, chopped

3 stalks celery, chopped

¥ teaspoon cayenne pepper

1 teaspoon turmeric

1 teaspoon coriander

1 teaspoon curry powder

2 tablespoons tamari soy sauce

6 cups water

2 medium carrots, sliced

2 large potatoes, cut into Y-inch cubes
¥ cup brown rice

1 red pepper, diced

1 green pepper, diced

1 tomato, diced

1 cup cauliflower, chopped

% cup grated unsweetened coconut

3 teaspoons lemon juice

In a large soup pot, heat oil over medium and cook onions and
celery for about 5 minutes until onions are translucent.

Add cayenne, turmeric, coriander, curry, tamari, water, carrots,
potatoes, and rice. Bring to a boil, reduce heat, cover, and simmer
for 20 minutes.

Add peppers, tomato, cauliflower, coconut, and lemon juice. Let
simmer covered for 15-20 minutes more until vegetables and rice
are tender.

Remove and blend half of the soup in a blender or food processor.
Return blended soup to pot.

Serve warm.

Creamy Broccoli Soup
Total prep and cooking time: 40 minutes

Serves 4
1 medium onion, chopped
2 cloves garlic, minced
1 tablespoon grapeseed oil
5 cups vegetable broth
2 bunches broccoli, chopped
1 carrot, chopped
1 cup cooked brown rice

Sauté onion and garlic in 1 tablespoon of grapeseed oil until
translucent.

In a pot, bring vegetable broth to a boil.

Add broccoli, carrot, and sautéed onion.

Reduce heat and simmer for 15 minutes.

Add brown rice and stir.

Put soup in the blender and blend until smooth.

Return soup to pot and cook for another 5 minutes. Serve warm.

Lentil Soup
Total prep and cooking time: 1 hour 10 minutes

Serves 4

¥ cup red or green lentils
1 cup chopped onion

2 cloves garlic, rushed

1 stalk celery, chopped

2 carrots, chopped

2 cups shredded cabbage

2 cups vegetable broth

1(28 oz.) can whole tomatoes, chopped
1 teaspoon salt

¥ teaspoon ground black pepper

¥ teaspoon white sugar

¥ teaspoon dried basil and thyme

¥ teaspoon curry powder

Place the lentils into a large pot and add water to twice the depth of
the lentils. Bring to a boil, and then lower heat and let simmer for
about 15 minutes.

Drain and rinse lentils; return them to the pot.
Sauté onion, garlic, celery, carrots, and cabbage for 5 minutes.

Add sautéed onion, garlic, celery, cabbage, vegetable broth, and
tomatoes to the pot containing the lentils and season with salt,

pepper, sugar, basil, thyme, and curry.

Cook, simmering for 1 hour. Serve warm.

Quinoa Salad
Total prep and cooking time: 30 minutes

Serves 8

2 cups cooked quinoa
2 cups fresh spinach, chopped
¥ cup radishes, chopped

¥ cup cucumber, chopped

¥ cup celery, chopped

¥ cup red onion, chopped

¥ cup chopped red bell pepper
¥ cup almonds, chopped

2 tablespoons olive oil

1 tablespoon balsamic vinegar

Combine all ingredients together in a big bowl.

Mix well and serve.

Fennel and Beet Salad

Total prep and cooking time: 50 minutes

Serves 6
4 large beets, chopped in Y-inch pieces
2 small fennel bulbs, thinly sliced
1 bunch mint leaves, thinly sliced
3 oranges, juiced
¥ cup balsamic vinegar
3 tablespoons sunflower seeds

Boil beets in a large pot for 20-30 minutes until a fork pierces easily
through the middle of each beet.

‘When beets are cooked, drain and rinse with cold water.
Chop the beets into %-inch pieces (if not already done).
Add all ingredients into a large bowl and mix well.

Sprinkle sunflower seeds on top and serve.

Chickpea and Spinach Salad
Total prep and cooking time: 1 hour

Serves 4
32 ounces cooked chickpeas (or 2 cans organic chickpeas, drained
and rinsed)
1 large red onion, thinly sliced
1 large red or yellow pepper, chopped
1 cup spinach, chopped
4 tablespoons fresh cilantro, chopped
2 cloves garlic, rushed
3 tablespoons olive oil
Juice 1%: limes

Drain and rinse the canned chickpeas (if using).
Combine with onion, pepper, spinach, and cilantro.

Mix together the garlic, olive oil, and lime juice. Pour over the
chickpea mixture and mix well.

Chill in the refrigerator for at least 30 minutes to allow the
chickpeas to absorb the flavors. Serve chilled.


Spicy Thai Salad
Total prep and cooking time: 40 minutes

Serves 4 as side dish, 2 as main course

Salad Dressing

1 tablespoon lime juice

1 tablespoon soy sauce

1 tablespoon fish sauce (vegetarians: substitute 1 tablespoon tamari)

1 teaspoon white wine vinegar or rice vinegar

2-3 cloves fresh garlic, minced

1 fresh red
crushed chili

li, deseeded and minced, or %-% teaspoon dried,

1 pinch black pepper
1-2 teaspoon white sugar (to taste)

Salad

1 large English cucumber, sliced into Y-inch pieces
1 carrot, grated

1 cup whole roasted unsalted cashews

1 red bell pepper, sliced thinly

2 green onions, sliced

1 bunch fresh
2 large handfuls mixed leafy greens

ilantro

First make the dressing by mixing all salad dressing ingredients
together in the bowl.

Taste-test for sourness/spiciness and set aside.

Add the cucumber, grated carrot, cashews, red pepper, and green
onions to a large bowl.

Pour the dressing over and toss well.
Place salad on a mixed bed of fresh cilantro and leafy greens.
Serve immediately.

Avocado and Orange Salad
Total prep and cooking time: 15 minutes

Serves 4

Salad Dressing

2 tablespoons olive oil

2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar
Pinch salt and pepper

Salad

4 large handfuls mixed salad greens
2 oranges

2 avocados

¥ cup pumpkin seeds

Combine olive oil, balsamic vinegar, salt, and pepper in a small
bowl.

Place mixed salad, oranges, avocados, and pumpkin seeds in a large
salad bowl.

Pour dressing over salad and serve immediately.

Black Bean and Quinoa-Filled Peppers

Total prep and cooking time: 1 hour 15 minutes

Serves 4

2 tablespoons grapeseed oil
1 medium onion, chopped finely

3 cloves garlic, rushed

2 cups mushrooms, chopped finely

1 tablespoon chili powder

1 teaspoon salt

% cup quinoa

1 (15 oz.) can crushed tomatoes

Y cup water

1.(15 oz.) can black beans, drained and rinsed

3 teaspoons maple syrup

4 large red bell peppers, deseeded with tops cut off

Preheat oven to 400°F.

Heat grapeseed oil in a pan over medium heat and sauté onions 3-5
‘minutes until translucent and fragrant.

Add garlic and mushrooms and sauté another 5 minutes. Stir in chili
powder and salt.

Add the quinoa with 1 cup of the crushed tomatoes and water.

Lower the heat and cover, simmering for 15-20 minutes until
quinoa is cooked.

Add in the black beans and maple syrup and mix thoroughly.
Stuff the quinoa and black bean mixture into the peppers and place
into a baking dish.

Pour the remaining quinoa mixture and crushed tomatoes over the
peppers and bake for 40 minutes until peppers are wrinkled and
Soft. Serve immediately.

Portobello Ratatouille with Quinoa
Total prep and cooking time: 55 minutes

Serves 4

4 large portobello mushrooms, stems removed
1 large red onion, thinly sliced
1 bunch fresh basil

1 large tomato, thinly sliced

1 tablespoon ground oregano
Dash salt and pepper

1 tablespoon grapeseed oil

1 small onion, diced

2 cloves garlic, rushed

4 ounces mushrooms, sliced

1 cup quinoa

2 cups vegetable stock

¥ teaspoon salt

Preheat oven to 400°F.

Place portobello mushrooms (gill-side up) on a baking sheet.

Layer red onion slices, basil leaves, and tomato slices onto the
‘mushrooms.

Sprinkle each portobello mushroom with dried oregano, salt, and
pepper.

Place in oven and bake for 30-40 minutes until mushrooms are
tender.

Heat the grapeseed oil in a large pan on medium-low heat.

Add the small onion and cook for about 5 minutes until transparent.

Stir in quinoa, vegetable stock, and salt and bring to a boil. Once
boiling, reduce heat, cover, and simmer for 15 minutes.

Serve quinoa together with a portobello mushroom.

Chana Masala

Total prep and cooking time: 45 minutes

Serves 6

1 cup brown rice

1 tablespoon coconut oil

2 medium onions, peeled and minced

2 cloves garlic, peeled and minced

1 tablespoon ground coriander

2 teaspoons ground cumin

¥ teaspoon ground cayenne pepper

1 teaspoon ground turmeric

1 medium tomato, chopped

4 cups cooked chickpeas or 2 (15 oz) cans chickpeas, rinsed and
drained

1 cup vegetable broth

2 teaspoons paprika

1 teaspoon garam masala

¥ teaspoon salt

¥ lemon, juiced

2 teaspoons grated fresh ginger

4 cups fresh spinach

Add rice to a boiling pot of water. Cover and simmer for 45 minutes
or until desired tenderness is reached.

Heat coconut oil in a large skillet. Add onions and garlic and sauté
over medium heat until browned (3-5 minutes).

Turn heat to medium-low.

Add the coriander, cumin, cayenne, and turmeric. Stir for a few
seconds.

Add the tomatoes and stir.
Cook the tomatoes until lightly browned.

Add chickpeas and a cup of vegetable broth and stir.
Add the paprika, garam masala, salt, and lemon juice.
Cook covered for 10 minutes.

Remove the cover and add the ginger. Stir and cook uncovered for
another 30 seconds.

Serve warm over a bed of fresh spinach and brown rice.

Tip: Instead of using individual spices, you can use a chana masala
spice mix, found in most Indian grocery stores.

Green Lentil Salad

Total prep and cooking time: 45 minutes

Serves 4

2 cups dried green lentils
3 cups vegetable stock

2 onions, chopped

2 red peppers, thinly sliced
1 bunch cilantro, chopped
1 spring onion, chopped

1 carrot, shredded

3 prawns (optional)

4 cups leafy salad greens

Salad Dressing

3 tablespoons lemon juice

Y cup olive oil

3 tablespoons balsamic vinegar
Salt and pepper, to taste

Rinse lentils and place in a large pot.

Add vegetable stock and onions to the lentils and bring to a boil.
Once it boils, reduce heat and simmer for about 15 minutes or until
lentils are tender.

Meanwhile, combine lemon juice, olive oil, and balsamic vinegar in
a small bowl and mix thoroughly. Set aside.

Combine red peppers, cilantro, spring onion, and carrot in a large
bowl.

If you want to add prawns, place in a small pan and cook with garlic
for a couple of minutes, until they turn white.

Once lentils are tender, remove from heat and drain off remaining
broth. Let cool.

Place lentils in a large bowl and top with carrot, red pepper,
cilantro, spring onion, leafy salad greens, and prawns (optional).

Pour dressing over salad and serve immediately.

Grilled Vegetables with Brown Rice
Total prep and cooking time: 55 minutes

Serves 4

1% cups brown rice

3 peppers (yellow, red, and green), deseeded and cut into quarters
2 medium red onions, sliced

3 portobello mushrooms, sliced

2 small zucchinis, cut in half lengthways and sliced thinly

Olive oil, for brushing

2 tablespoons fresh thyme, chopped

Dressing

2 tablespoons olive oil

2 tablespoons lemon juice
2 cloves garlic, rushed
Salt and pepper, to taste

Place brown rice in a pot with water. Bring to a boil, and then
simmer for 45 minutes or until tender.

Mix together the dressing. Set aside.

Arrange vegetables on a grill rack. Brush with olive oil and grill for
8-10 minutes or until tender and slightly brown.

Drain the rice and place in a bowl. Pour half the dressing over the
top.

Add the vegetables on top, and then pour over the remaining
dressing.

Garnish with chopped thyme.

Vegetarian Chili
Total prep and cooking time: 45 minutes

Serves 6-8

1 tablespoon grapeseed oil
1 chopped onion

3 cloves minced garlic

2 tomatoes, diced, or

1 can organic diced tomatoes

2 carrots, cut into quarter-moons

2 stalks celery, sliced

10 mushrooms, sliced

2 tablespoons chili powder

2 teaspoons ground cumin

¥ teaspoon ground cloves

2 teaspoons unsweetened cocoa powder

3 cups black beans or kidney beans (cooked or canned)
1 cup water

2 tablespoons organic tomato paste

1 teaspoon sea salt

4 cups fresh spinach

Heat grapeseed oil in a large, heavy pan.

Add onions and garlic and sauté for 5 minutes.

Add the rest of the vegetables, chili powder, and cumin.
Sauté for another 5 minutes.

Add the rest of the ingredients (except spinach) and cook on low to
‘medium heat for 30 minutes.

Serve warm on a bed of spinach.

Lemon and Dill Halibut
Total prep and cooking time: 20 minutes

Serves 4
4 halibut fish fillets
Dash sea salt
Dash black pepper
¥ cup fresh dill, finely chopped
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice

Rinse fish under cold water.
Season with salt and pepper.

Fill a skillet with %-1 inch of water and heat until steaming.
Place fish in the skillet and top with dill.

Cook until fish is soft and flaking (about 5-7 minutes).

Squeeze lemon juice over fish, remove from heat, and serve
immediately.

Serve with your choice of Happy Hormones side dishes.

Tilapia with Roasted Red Pepper and Mango
Salsa

Total prep and cooking time: 1 hour 15 minutes

Serves 4

Brown Rice
1 cup brown rice
2 cups water or vegetable stock

Salad

5 cups mixed salad greens

1 tomato, cut into Ya-inch pieces
1 avocado, cut into

Vo-inch pieces

¥ cucumber, cut into half-moons
3 green onions, sliced thinly
Va-V teaspoon white sugar

Pinch salt

Drizzle white vinegar

Mango Salsa
2 red peppers, roasted
2 mangoes, diced

1 small red onion, diced
¥ jalapefio (if desired), minced
% cup cilantro, chopped

Juice of % lime

Salt and pepper (to taste)

Fish
1 tablespoon grapeseed oil
4 tilapia fillets

Place rice with 2 cups of water or vegetable broth into a pot and
bring to a boil. Cover, reduce heat, and simmer for 45 minutes until
rice is cooked to desired tenderness.

Turn on the broiler inside your oven and move rack to highest
position. Put the red peppers directly onto the rack and allow skin
to blacken. Turn peppers until most of the skin is charred.

Place peppers into a bowl and cover with plastic wrap. After 10-15
minutes, the skin can be peeled off under running water. Remove
seeds and ribs and chop into small pieces for your salsa.

Toss mango, roasted peppers, red onion, jalapefio (optional), and
cilantro with the lime juice and season with salt and pepper.

Place all of your salad ingredients into a bowl and mix well.
Sprinkle sugar and salt over the salad and drizzle with vinegar. Toss
together.

Heat your grill. If you are using a barbecue, drizzle grapeseed oil
onto a bed of aluminum foil and place fish fillets on top. If you are
using a grill pan, lightly oil it with grapeseed oil. Grill fish until
opaque (cooking time varies, depending on thickness of fish).

Serve fish hot on a bed of rice, garnished with salsa and the side
salad.

Chicken Fajitas
Total prep and cooking time: 30 minutes

Serves 4

Fajita Mixture

1% pounds chicken breast, cut into strips, -inch thick
2 tablespoons grape seed oil

2 medium red onions, sliced lengthwise

3 bell peppers of various colors, sliced into -inch strips
2 cups fresh spinach

8-12 soft corn tortillas

2 avocados, chopped

2 tomatoes, chopped

2 cups mixed salad greens

1 jalapefio (if you like spice), minced (optional)

Fajita Marinade

Juice of 1 lime

3 tablespoons olive oil

1 clove garlic, minced

¥ teaspoon salt

¥ teaspoon ground cumin
¥ teaspoon chili powder

¥ jalapefio, seeded and minced
¥ cup chopped cilantro

Combine marinade ingredients in a large bowl. Add chicken strips
and coat well. Allow to marinate for 45 minutes.

Heat grapeseed oil in a large pan over high heat and cook your
chicken strips until they are three-fourths of the way done (about 4-
5 minutes).

Add the onion and pepper strips and cook until onions are soft and
fragrant.

Add in spinach and heat until wilted.

Serve in com tortillas with avocado, tomato, salad greens, and
jalapefio (if using).
Serve with your choice of Happy Hormones side dishes.

Roasted Chicken with Balsamic Vinaigrette
Total prep and cooking time: 2V% hours

Serves 8
1 whole organic chicken
Salt and freshly ground black pepper
1 large sweet onion, chopped
5 fresh figs, quartered
¥ cup balsamic vinegar
Ys cup extra virgin olive oil
1 tablespoon Dijon mustard
2 cloves garlic, rushed
1 tablespoon maple syrup
Fresh rosemary sprigs

Preheat oven to 475°F.

Rinse chicken under cold running water. Place chicken into a large
baking dish or roasting pan. Sprinkle with salt and freshly ground
black pepper.

Place half of the chopped onion inside the chicken cavity and the
other half scattered along the bottom of the pan.

Place the figs around the chicken.

Whisk together the balsamic vinegar, olive oil, Dijon mustard,
garlic, and maple syrup in a small bowl or cup. Pour over the
chicken.


Place a few fresh rosemary sprigs on and around the chicken.
Add about ¥ cup of water to the bottom of the pan.

Place in the oven and roast at 475°F for about 20 minutes to seal in
the juices. Reduce heat to 325°F and continue to cook until juices
run clear (about another 1% hours).

Serve with your choice of Happy Hormones side dishes.

Grilled Steak with Vegetable Skewers
Total prep and cooking time: 30 minutes

Serves 3-4

1 pound sirloin steak
1 cup quinoa

2 cups water

2 colored peppers, sliced into quarters

2 small zucchinis, chopped into Y-inch rounds
1 large onion, chopped into Y-inch rounds

12 mushrooms, whole

1 tablespoon grapeseed oil

Salt and pepper (to taste)

Marinade

¥ cup cooking sherry

¥ cup tamari soy sauce

Y cup oil

2 tablespoons honey

2 tablespoons grated ginger root
2 cloves garlic, minced

Combine marinade ingredients in a small jar and shake to combine.

Cut steak into 2-inch cubes and place in a container. Pour over
‘marinade and let marinate for 2-24 hours.

Pour off excess marinade and skewer steak pieces before grilling.
Place quinoa and water into a pot and bring to a boil. Cover, reduce
heat to a simmer, and cook for 15 minutes until quinoa is tender.
Combine vegetables in a bowl, lightly drizzle with oil, and season
with salt and pepper.

Heat grill or barbecue, and grill steak skewers to desired wellness.
Remove from heat and cover with aluminum foil while vegetables
get their tun.

Place vegetables on the grill, and grill until desired tenderness.

Thai Green Curry
Total prep and cooking time: 45 minutes

Serves 4

1 cup brown rice
2 tablespoons green curry paste (recipe follows)

1 tablespoon grapeseed oil

1 (15 oz.) can coconut milk

1 pound flank steak, cut into 1-inch pieces

1 teaspoon lime juice

1 red bell pepper, diced

1 medium zucchini, cut in half lengthwise, and then into half-moons
1 tablespoon brown sugar

1 teaspoon fish sauce

Ys cup Thai basil leaves

4 cups spinach

Green Curry Paste

4 small green Thai chilies, or 1-2 jalapeiio peppers
¥ cup red onion, diced

4 cloves garlic, minced

1 thumb-size piece fresh ginger, grated

1 stalk fresh lemongrass, minced

¥ teaspoon ground coriander

¥ teaspoon ground cumin
1 cup fresh cilantro leaves and stems, chopped
3 tablespoons fish sauce
1 teaspoon brown sugar
2 tablespoons lime juice

In a food processor or blender, combine the curry paste ingredients
until a paste forms. If necessary, add a splash of water or coconut
milk.

Place rice in a pot with 2 cups of water and bring to a boil. Once
boiling, cover and reduce heat.

Simmer for 45 minutes until rice reaches the desired tenderness.

Combine 2 tablespoons of green curry paste with the grapeseed oil
over medium heat and cook until fragrant. Add % cup of coconut
milk and stir until the oil comes to the surface.

Add the steak and lime juice and continue cooking until the steak is
almost done.

Add the red pepper, zucchini, remaining coconut milk, brown sugar,
and fish sauce. Bring to a boil.

Add the basil, stir, and remove from heat.

Serve over a bed of spinach and brown rice.

Honey Gingered Salmon
Total prep and cooking time: 75 minutes

Serves 4

4 salmon fillets

1 teaspoon ground ginger

1 teaspoon garlic powder

¥ cup tamari

3 tablespoons freshly squeezed orange juice
3 tablespoons honey

1 green onion, chopped

Place salmon in a large dish.
Combine ginger, garlic, tamari, orange juice, honey, and green
onion and mix well.

Pour over the salmon.

Cover the salmon and refrigerate for 1 hour.

Preheat a grill to medium heat and lightly oil to prevent the fish
from sticking to the grill

Remove the salmon from the fridge, discarding any excess
‘marinade.

Grill salmon for 12-15 minutes per inch of thickness or until the fish
flakes easily with a fork.

Serve with your choice of Happy Hormones side dishes.

Tabbouleh
Total prep and cooking time: 40 minutes

Serves 6
1 cup quinoa
2 cups water
1.(15 oz.) can garbanzo beans
¥ cup parsley, chopped
1 bunch mint, chopped
2 medium cucumbers, chopped
2 tomatoes, chopped
3 tablespoons lemon juice
4 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
Sea salt (to taste)

Place quinoa in a pot and add 2 cups of water. Bring to a boil.

Reduce heat to low and simmer covered for 20 minutes or until
quinoa reaches the desired tenderness.

Fluff with a fork, cover, and let sit for another 10 minutes.
Rinse the garbanzo beans and set aside.

Place garbanzo beans, parsley, mint, cucumber, and tomato in a
large bowl. Add quinoa once cooled and combine with other
ingredients.

Mix the lemon juice and olive oil in a small bowl and pour over the
quinoa and vegetable mixture. Gently mix and salt to taste.

Ginger and Garlic Collard Greens
Total prep and cooking time: 20 minutes

Serves 4
2 bunches mixed collard greens, chopped
2 cloves garlic, finely chopped
2 teaspoons ginger, finely chopped
2 teaspoons tamari
2 teaspoons olive oil

Fill a large pot with % inch of water and heat to high.

Add mixed collard greens and cook for 3 minutes until desired
tenderness is reached.

In a frying pan sauté garlic and ginger for 30 seconds until golden
brown.
Strain greens through a colander and transfer to a bowl.

Add the sautéed garlic, ginger, tamari, and olive oil and mix well.

Collard Greens with Toasted Pine Nuts and
Raisins
Total prep and cooking time: 20 minutes

Serves 6

¥ cup pine nuts
1 tablespoon grapeseed oil

2 bunches mixed collard greens, chopped
¥ teaspoon sea salt

Y cup raisins

Preheat oven to 350°F.

Place pine nuts on a baking tray and toast for 5 minutes or until
light brown. Set aside and let cool.

Heat grapeseed oil in a pan.
Add collard greens, sea salt, and raisins. Stir and cook for 5 minutes.

‘Turn off heat, add in pine nuts, and transfer to serving dish.

Warm Broccoli and Avocado Salad

Total prep and cooking time: 20 minutes

Serves 6

2 bunches broccoli, chopped
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice
1 tablespoon olive oil

¥ teaspoon sea salt

1 avocado, chopped

Fill a pot with 1 inch of water and steam broccoli for 7-10 minutes
or until tender.

In a mixing bowl, combine the lemon juice, olive oil, and salt. Add
the avocado and warm broccoli. Mix and serve.

Sautéed Brussels Sprouts with Cranberries
Total prep and cooking time: 15 minutes

Serves 6

2 tablespoons grapeseed oil
1 small red onion, thinly sliced

¥ cup slivered almonds

2 pounds Brussels sprouts, halved
¥ teaspoon sea salt

¥ cup dried cranberries

¥ cup water

Freshly ground black pepper

Heat grapeseed oil in a large pot.
Add red onion and sauté for 2 minutes.

Add slivered almonds, Brussels sprouts, and sea salt. Sauté for
another 5 minutes.

Add the dried cranberries and water.

Cook covered, stirring occasionally for 5-10 minutes until desired
tenderness is reached.

Season with freshly ground black pepper and serve.

Almond and Raisin Coleslaw

Total prep and cooking time: 15 minutes

Serves 6
3 cups green cabbage, sliced
2 cups red cabbage, sliced
4 carrots, grated
% cup fresh chives, chopped
% cup chopped almonds
¥ cup raisins

Dressing

6 tablespoons olive oil

4 tablespoons apple cider vinegar
1 tablespoon honey

1 teaspoon Dijon mustard

¥ teaspoon sea salt

Combine cabbage, carrots, chives, almonds, and raisins in a large
‘mixing bowl. Mix well.

Whisk ingredients for the dressing in a small bowl. Pour over the
vegetables and mix well.

Cucumber Tomato and Basil Salad

Total prep and cooking time: 15 minutes

Serves 4

1 large cucumber, sliced
3 tomatoes, quartered, and then sliced

¥ cup fresh basil, thinly sliced

2 cloves fresh garlic, finely chopped

2 tablespoons olive oil

2 tablespoons red wine vinegar

Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper (to taste)

Place all ingredients into a large bowl and mix together. Add salt
and pepper to taste. Gently toss and serve immediately.

Fruit and Nut Bars
Total cooking and prep time: 30 minutes

3% cups almonds
1 teaspoon sea salt

2 teaspoons vanilla extract

4 cups dried unsweetened pineapple, chopped
4 cups pitted dates

1% cups shredded coconut

Combine almonds, salt, and vanilla in a food processor. Process into
a fine powder.

Slowly add chopped pineapple and dates. Mix well.

Transfer to a large bowl and add in the coconut. Mix well.
Form into 2-inch bars.
Refrigerate and serve.

Store any extras in the freezer.

Kale Chips
Total cooking and prep time: 20 minutes

Serves 20 or more

2 bunches kale
2 tablespoons olive oil

1 teaspoon cayenne pepper
¥ teaspoon salt

1 teaspoon paprika powder

Preheat oven to 350°F.

Remove kale leaves from stalk, leaving them in large pieces.
Toss the leaves with olive oil.

Place the kale leaves on a baking pan in a single layer.
Bake for 10-12 minutes or until leaves start to brown.

Remove from oven and sprinkle with cayenne, salt, and paprika
powder.

Mixed Berries with Pumpkin Seeds
Total prep time: 10 minutes

Serves 1

1 tablespoon pumpkin seeds
% cup fresh berries

Sprinkle pumpkin seeds over berries. Enjoy.

Toasted Nut Mix
Total cooking and prep time: 20 minutes

Serves 8

¥ cup walnuts, raw and unsalted
¥ cup almonds, raw and unsalted
¥ cup pecans, raw and unsalted
¥ cup cashews, raw and unsalted
2 teaspoons coconut oil

2 teaspoons maple syrup

1 tablespoon garam masala

1 teaspoon sea salt

Preheat oven to 300°F.
In a bowl mix together nuts, oil, and maple syrup.

Place mixture on a baking sheet and roast in the oven until lightly
browned (about 10-15 minutes).

Remove from heat and toss with garam masala and salt.

Guacamole with Rice Crackers
Total prep time: 20 minutes

Serves 4

2 avocados, cut in half, with seeds removed
¥ small red onion, finely chopped

1 small tomato, finely chopped

¥ cup cilantro, chopped

Juice of 1 lime

¥ teaspoon sea salt and pepper

Rice crackers

Combine all ingredients in a mixing bowl and mash the avocado
with a fork until smooth.

Dip crackers and enjoy.

Celery Sticks with Almond Butter
Total prep time: 10 minutes

Serves 1

2 stalks celery
1 tablespoon almond butter

Wash and cut celery into 3-inch sticks.

Fill celery with almond butter.

References

‘What Are Hormones and Why Are They
Important?
Altern Med Rev. 2000; 5(4):306-33.

Barnes, BO, Galton. Hypothyroidism: the unsuspected illness. NY:
‘Thomas Crowell, 1976.

Beers, MH, Porter, RS, Jones, TV. The Merck Manual of Diagnosis
and Therapy. 18th ed. 2006. Merck Publishing Group.

Blanchard. K. The Functional Approach to Hypothyroidism. NY.
Hatherleigh Press. 2012.

Cooper DS. Subclinical hypothyroidism. Advances in Endocrinology
and Metabolism. 199! 5 77.

Gardner DG, Shoback D. Greenspan’s Basic & Clinical Endocrinology,
8th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Medical, 2007.

Hertoghe, T. The Hormone Solution. NY. Three Rivers Press. 2002.

Hudson, Tori. Women’s Encyclopedia of Natural Medicine. NY.
McGraw Hill. 2008.

Kelly, GS. Peripheral metabolism of thyroid hormones: a review.

Kharrazian, D. Why do I still have thyroid symptoms when my lab tests
are normal. CA: Elephant Printing, 2010.

Tilgner, S. Herbal Medicine From the Heart of the Earth. OR. Wise
Acres Press. 1999.

Tsigos, C, Chrouos, GP. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis,
neuroendocrine factors and stress. Journal of Psychosomatic Research.
2002; 53(4): 865-871

Weetman AP. Hypothyroidism:
British Medical Journal. 1997; 1

reening and subclinical disease.

11751178.

Wilson, J. Adrenal Fatigue the 21st Century Stress Syndrome. CA.
Smart Publications. 2001.

Symptoms of Hormonal Imbalances
Aardel Eriksson, E, Thorell, LH. Salivary cortisol, posttraumatic

stress symptoms and general health in the acute phase and during 9
‘month follow-up. Biol Psychiatry. 2001; 50(12): 986-993.

Arlt, W, et al. Dehydroepiandrosterone replacement in women with
adrenal insufficiency pharmacokinetics, bioconversion and clinical
effects on well-being, sexuality and cognition. Endocr Res. 2000;
26(4): 505-511.

Asthana, S, et al. High dose estradiol improves cognition for women
with AD: results of a randomized study, Neurology. 2001; 57(4):
605-612.

Barnes, BO, Galton. Hypothyroidism: the unsuspected illness. NY:
‘Thomas Crowell, 1976.

Beers, MH, Porter, RS, Jones, TV. The Merck Manual of Diagnosis
and Therapy. 18th ed. 2006. Merck Publishing Group.

Bernini, GP, et al. Influence of endogenous androgens on carotid
wall in postmenopausal women. Menopause: 2001; 8(1): 43-50.

Blanchard. K. The Functional Approach to Hypothyroidism. NY.
Hatherleigh Press. 2012.

Buchanan, JR, et al. Effect of excess endogenous androgens on bone
density in young women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998; 67(5): 937.

Chrouos, GP. The role of stress and the hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal axis in the pathogenesis of the metabolic syndrom
neuroendocrine and target tissue-related causes. Int J Obes Relat
Metab Discord. 2000; Jun; 24(2): S50-855.

Cleare, AJ, et al. Hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis dysfunction in
chronic fatigue syndrome, and the effects of low dose
hydrocortisone therapy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001; 86(8): 3545-
3554.

Cleghorn, RA. Adrenal cortisol insufficiency: psychological and
neurological observations. Canad Med Ass J. 1951; 65: 449.

Cooper DS. Subclinical hypothyroidism. Advances in Endocrinology
and Metabolism. 1991; 2; 77.

Davis, S.R. The clinical use of androgens in female sexual disorders.
J Sex Marital Ther. 1998; 24(3): 153-156.

De Lignieres, B, et al. Differential effects of exogenous estradiol and
progesterone on mood in postmenopausal women: individual
dose/effect relationship. Maturitas. 1982; 4: 67-72.

Demitrack MA. Evidence for impaired activation of the hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal axis in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. J. Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 1991; 73:1244-1234.

Deutsch, S, et al. The correlation of serum estrogens and androgens
with bone density in late postmenopause. Int J Gynaecol Obstet.

1987; 25(3): 217-222.

Fingerova, H, et al. Reduced serum dehydroepiandrosterone levels
in postmenopausal osteoporosis. Ceska Gynekol. 1998; 63(2): 110-
113.

Freeman, EW, et al. Anxiolytic metabolites of progesterone:
correlation with mood and performance measures following oral
progesterone administration to healthy female volunteers.
Neuroendocrinology. 1993; 58(4): 478-484.

Gardner DG, Shoback D. Greenspan’s Basic & Clinical Endocrinology,
8th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Medical, 2007.

Gold, PW, Chrousos, GP. Organization of the stress system and its
dysregulation in melancholic and atypical depression: high vs. low
CRH/NE states. Mol Psychiatry. 2002; 7(3): 254-175.

Greenspan SG, Gardner DG. Basic and Clinical Endocrinology. 6th
ed. CT. Appleton and Lange. 2001.

Guay, AT, Decreased testosterone in regularly menstruation women
with decreased libido: a clinical observation. J Sex Marital Ther.
2001; 27(5): 513-519.

Hertoghe, T. The Hormone Solution. NY. Three Rivers Press. 2002.

Holick, MF. Sunlight and vitamin D for bone health and prevention
of autoimmune diseases, cancers, and cardiovascular disease. Am J
Clin Nutr. December 2004; 80(6)

Kenny, AM, et al. Effects of transdermal testosterone on bone and
muscle in older men with low bioavailable testosterone levels. J
Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2001; 56(5)266-272.

Kharrazian, D. Why do I still have thyroid symptoms when my lab tests
are normal. CA: Elephant Printing, 2010.

Labrie, F, et al. Effect of 12 month dehydroepiandrosterone
replacement therapy on bone, vagina and endometrium in
postmenopausal women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1997; 82(10):
3498-3505.

Negata, C, et al. Association of dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate with
serum HDL cholesterol concentrations in post-menopausal Japanese
women. Maturitas. 1998; 31(1): 21-27.

Peters, EM, Anderson, R, Nieman, DC, et al. Vitamin C
supplementation attenuates the increases in circulating cortisol,
adrenaline and anti-inflammatory polypeptides following
ultramarathon running. Int J Sports Med. 2001; 22(7): 537-543.

Rothenberg, R, Hart, K. Hormone Optimization in
Preventative/Regenerative Medicine. Panda Press. CA.

Selye, H. The stress of life. NY: McGraw-Hill. 1956

Smith, YR, et al. Long term estrogen replacement is associated with
improved nonverbal memory and attentional measures in
postmenopausal women. Fertil Steril. 2001; 76(6): 1101-1107.

Smith, YR, et al. Long term estrogen replacement is associated with
improved nonverbal memory and attentional measures in
postmenopausal women. Feril Steril. 2001; 76(6): 1101-1107.

Stowe, RP, Pierson, DI, Barrett, AD. Elevated stress hormone levels
relate to Epstein-Barr virus reactivation in astronauts. Psychosom
Med. 2001; 63(6):

Straub, RH, Herfarth, H, Falk, W, et al. Uncoupling of the
sympathetic nervous system and the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis in inflammatory bowel disease? Neuroimmunol. 2002; 126(1-2):
116-125.

Tintera, JW. Hypoadrenocorticism. NY: Adrenal Metabolic Research
Society. 1956

Tsigos, C, Chrouos, GP. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis,
neuroendocrine factors and stress. Journal of Psychosomatic Research.
2002; 53(4): 865-871

Tsigos, C, Chrousos, GP. Physiology of the hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal axis in health and dysregulation in psychiatric and
autoimmune disorders. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 1994; Sept;
23(3): 451-466.

Van den Berghe, G. The neuroendocrine response to stress is a
dynamic process. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001; Dec;
15.

Wang, C, et al. Transdermal testosterone gel improves sexual
function, mood, muscle strength, and body composition parameters
in hypogonadal men. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000; 85(8): 2839-
2853.

Weetman AP. Hypothyroidism: screening and subeli
British Medical Journal. 1997; 19: 1175-1178.

ical disease.

Wilson, J. Adrenal Fatigue the 21st Century Stress Syndrome. CA.
Smart Publications. 2001.

Nutrition for Happy Hormones

Anderson, JW. Dietary Fibre, complex carbohydrate and coronary
artery disease. Can J Cardiol. 1995; 11: 55G-62G.

Fruedenheim, JL, et al. Premenopausal breast cancer risk and intake
of vegetables, fruit and related nutrients. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1996;
88: 340-348.

Fuyns, A. Alcohol and Cancer. Proc Nutr Soc. 1990; 49: 145-151.

Ginsburg, E. Effects of alcohol ingestion on estrogen in
postmenopausal women. JAMA. 1996; 276(21): 1747-1751.

Holick, MF. Sunlight and vitamin D for bone health and prevention
of autoimmune diseases, cancers, and cardiovascular disease. Am J
Clin Nutr. December 2004; 80(6)

Ingram, DM, et al. Effect of low fat diet on female sex hormone
levels. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1987; 79(6): 1225-1229.

Marz, R. Medical Nutrition From Marz. 2nd ed. Omni-press. OR.
1999.

Pitchford, P. Healing with Whole Foods. Revised Edition. North
Atlantic Books. CA. 1993.

Natural Solutions for Estrogen Excess and
Deficiency

Anderson, JW. Dietary Fibre, complex carbohydrate and coronary
artery disease. Can J Cardiol. 1995; 11: 55G-62G.

Bone, K. The Ultimate Herbal Compendium. Australia. Phytotherapy
Press. 2007.

Dalton, K. The premenstrual syndrome and progesterone therapy.
Chicago IL: Year Book Pub. 1977.

Deutsch, S, et al. The correlation of serum estrogens and androgens
with bone density in late postmenopause. Int J Gynaecol Obstet.
1987; 25(3): 217-222.

Duker, E, et al. Effects of Extracts from Cimicifuga racemosa on
gonadotropin release in menopausal women and ovariectomized
rats. Plant Med. 1991; 57; 420-424.


Greenspan SG, Gardner DG. Basic and Clinical Endocrinology. 6th
ed. CT. Appleton and Lange. 2001.

Hansel, R. Phytopharmaka. 2nd ed. Berlin: Springer Verlag; 199
223-230.

Herous O, Peter D, Heggtevelt HA. Long term effect of suboptimal
magnesium and calcium contents of organs on cold intolerance and
life span, and the pathological consequences in rats. Journal of
Nutrition. 1997; 107:1640

Holick, MF. Sunlight and vitamin D for bone health and prevention
of autoimmune diseases, cancers, and cardiovascular disease. Am J
Clin Nutr. December 2004; 80(6)

Horrobin DF. The role of essential fatty acids and prostaglandins in
premenstrual syndrome. Journal of Reproductive Medicine. 1983;
28:465

Hudson, Tori. Women’s Encyclopedia of Natural Medicine. NY.
McGraw Hill. 2008.

Kotsopoulos, J, et al. Relationship between caffeine intake and
plasma sex hormone concentrations in premenopaus:
postmenopausal women. Cancer. 2009; 115(12): 2765-74.

Lee, JR. What your doctor may not tell you about menopause. NY:
Warner Books. 1996.

Marz, R. Medical Nutrition From Marz. 2nd ed. Omni-press. OR.
1999.

Mayo, JL. A Natural Approach to Menopause. Clin Nutr Insights.
1997; 7: 1-8.

Rothenberg, R, Hart, K. Hormone Optimization in
Preventative/Regenerative Medicine. Panda Press. CA.

Sherwood, RA, et al. Magnesium and the premenstrual syndrome.
Ann Clin Biochem. 1986; 67.

Smith, YR, et al. Long term estrogen replacement is associated with
improved nonverbal memory and attentional measures in
postmenopausal women. Fertil Steril. 2001; 76(6): 1101-1107.

Tabakova P, Dimitrov M, Ognyanov K, Popvassilev N. “Clinical
study of Tribestan in females with endocrine sterility.” Unpublished.
tribestan.com.

Tilgner, S. Herbal Medicine From the Heart of the Earth. OR. Wise
Acres Press. 1999.

Wimalawansa, SJ, et al. The effect of percutaneous estradiol and
low dose human calcitonin on postmenopausal vertebral bone loss.
Osteoporosis. 1987; 528-532.

Natural Solutions for Progesterone
Deficiency

Bone, K. The Ultimate Herbal Compendium. Australia. Phytotherapy
Press. 2007.

Dalton, K. The premenstrual syndrome and progesterone therapy.
Chicago IL: Year Book Pub. 1977.

Freeman, EW, et al. Anxiolytic metabolites of progesterone:
correlation with mood and performance measures following oral
progesterone administration to healthy female volunteers.
Neuroendocrinology. 199 8(4): 478-484.

Herous O, Peter D, Heggtevelt HA. Long term effect of suboptimal
magnesium and calcium contents of organs on cold intolerance and

life span, and the pathological consequences in rats. Journal of
Nutrition. 1997; 107:1640

Holick, MF. Sunlight and vitamin D for bone health and prevention
of autoimmune diseases, cancers, and cardiovascular disease. Am J
Clin Nutr. December 2004; 80(6)

Horrobin, DF. The role of essential fatty acids and prostaglandins in
premenstrual syndrome. Journal of Reproductive Medicine. 198:
28:465

Hudson, Tori. Women’s Encyclopedia of Natural Medicine. NY.
McGraw Hill. 2008.

Lee, JR. What your doctor may not tell you about menopause. NY:
Warner Books. 1996.

Marz, R. Medical Nutrition From Marz. 2nd ed. Omni-press. OR.
1999.

Peters, JR, Walker, RF, Riad-Fahmy, D, Hall, R. Salivary cortisol
assays for assessing pituitary-adrenal reserve. Clin Endocrinol. 1982.
17; 6: 583-592.

Rothenberg, R, Hart K. Hormone Optimization in
Preventative/Regenerative Medicine. Panda Press. CA.

Saden-Krehula, M, et al. Delta-3-ketosteroids in the Flowers and
Leaves of Vitex agnus-castus. Planta Med. 1990; 56: 547.

Sherwood, RA, et al. Magnesium and the premenstrual syndrome.
Ann Clin Biochem. 1986; 67.

sliutz, G, et al. Agnus-castus extracts inhibit prolactin secretion of rat
pituitary cells. Horm Metab Res. 1993; 25(5): 253-255.

Tilgner, S. Herbal Medicine From the Heart of the Earth. OR. Wise
Acres Press. 1999.

Wilson, J. Adrenal Fatigue the 21st Century Stress Syndrome. CA.
Smart Publications. 2001.

Natural Solutions for Cortisol Excess and
Deficiency

Bone, K. The Ultimate Herbal Compendium. Australia. Phytotherapy
Press. 2007.

Brekham II, Kirillov OL Effect of Eleutherococcus on alarm phase of
stress. Life Science. 1969; 8(3): 113-121.

Bruneton, J. Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Medicinal Plants. Pari
Lavoisier; 1995.

Cleare, AJ, et al. Hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis dysfunction in
chronic fatigue syndrome, and the effects of low dose
hydrocortisone therapy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001; 86(8): 3545-
3554.

Greenspan SG, Gardner DG. Basic and Clinical Endocrinology. 6th
ed. CT. Appleton and Lange. 2001.

Holick, MF. Sunlight and vitamin D for bone health and prevention
of autoimmune diseases, cancers, and cardiovascular disease. Am J
Clin Nutr. December 2004; 80(6)

Hudson, Tori. Women’s Encyclopedia of Natural Medicine. NY.
McGraw Hill. 2008.

Jefferies, W. Safe Uses of Cortisone. IL. Thomas, 1981.

Kraemer, WJ, et al. Effects of heavy-resistance training on hormonal
response patterns in younger vs. older men. Journal of Applied
Physiology. 1999; 87(3): 982-992.

Marz, R. Medical Nutrition From Marz. 2nd ed. Omni-press. OR.
1999.

Peters, EM, Anderson, R, Nieman, DC, et Vitamin C
supplementation attenuates the increases in circulating cortisol,
adrenaline and anti-inflammatory polypeptides following
ultramarathon running. Int J Sports Med. 2001; 22(7): 537-543.

Rothenberg, R, Hart K. Hormone Optimization in
Preventative/Regenerative Medicine. Panda Press. CA.

Selye, H. The stress of life. NY: McGraw-Hill. 1956

Tilgner, S. Herbal Medicine From the Heart of the Earth. OR. Wise
Acres Press. 1999.

Tsigos, C, Chrouos, GP. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis,
neuroendocrine factors and stress. Journal of Psychosomatic Research.
2002; 53(4): 865-871

Volek JS, Kraemer WJ, Bush JA, Incledon, T, Boetes, M.
Testosterone and cortisol in relationship to dietary nutrients and
resistance exercise. Journal of Applied Physiology. 1997; 82(1): 49-54.

Wilson, J. Adrenal Fatigue the 21st Century Stress Syndrome. CA.
Smart Publications. 2001.

Natural Solutions for Low Thyroid

Barnes, BO, Galton. Hypothyroidism: the unsuspected illness. NY:
‘Thomas Crowell, 1976.

Berry MJ, Larsen PR. The role of selenium in thyroid hormone
tion. Endocrine Reviews. 1992; 13: 207-220.


Blanchard. K. The Functional Approach to Hypothyroidism. NY.
Hatherleigh Press. 2012.

Bone, K. The Ultimate Herbal Compendium. Australia
Press. 2007.

Phytotherapy

Cooper DS. Subclinical hypothyroidism. Advances in Endocrinology
and Metabolism. 1991; 2; 77.

Gardner DG, Shoback D. Greenspan’s Basic & Clinical Endocrinology,
8th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Medical, 2007.

Goodman, LS, Gilman A. The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics.
9th ed. MacMillan Pub. Co., NY, 1975.

Hertoghe, T. The Hormone Solution. NY. Three Rivers Press. 2002.

Holick, MF. Sunlight and vitamin D for bone health and prevention
of autoimmune diseases, cancers, and cardiovascular disease. Am J
Clin Nutr. December 2004; 80(6)

Hudson, Tori. Women’s Encyclopedia of Natural Medicine. NY.
McGraw Hill. 2008.

Kharrazian, D. Why do I still have thyroid symptoms when my lab tests
are normal. CA: Elephant Printing, 2010.

Marz, R. Medical Nutrition From Marz. 2nd ed. Omni-press. OR.
1999.

Meinhold H, et al. Effects of iodine and selenium deficiency on
iodothyronine deiodinases in brain, thyroid, and peripheral tissue.
JAMA. 1992; 19:8-12.

Nishiyama S, Futagoishi-Suginohara Y, Matsukura M, et al. Zinc
supplementation alters thyroid hormone metabolism in disabled
patients with zinc deficiency. J Am Coll Nutr. 1994; 13; 62-67.


Pizzomo JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine. Churchill
Livingstone, NY, 1999.

Rothenberg, R, Hart, K. Hormone Optimization in
Preventative/Regenerative Medicine. Panda Press. CA.

Tilgner, S. Herbal Medicine From the Heart of the Earth. OR. Wise
Acres Press. 1999.

Weetman AP. Hypothyroidism: screening and subclinical disease.

British Medical Journal. 1997; 19: 1175-1178.

Wilson, J. Adrenal Fatigue the 21st Century Stress Syndrome. CA.
Smart Publications. 2001.

Natural Solutions for DHEA Deficiency

Bone, K. The Ultimate Herbal Compendium. Australia. Phytotherapy
Press. 2007.

Buchanan, JR, et al. Effect of excess endogenous androgens on bone
density in young women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998; 67(5): 937.

Fingerova, H, et al. Reduced serum dehydroepiandrosterone levels
in postmenopausal osteoporosis. Ceska Gynekol. 1998; 63(2): 110-
113.

Holick, MF. Sunlight and vitamin D for bone health and prevention
of autoimmune diseases, cancers, and cardiovascular disease. Am J
Clin Nutr. December 2004; 80(6)

Hudson, Tori. Women’s Encyclopedia of Natural Medicine. NY.
McGraw Hill. 2008.

Labrie, F, et al. Effect of 12 month dehydroepiandrosterone
replacement therapy on bone, vagina and endometrium in

postmenopausal women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1997; 82(10):
3498-3505.

Marz, R. Medical Nutrition From Marz. 2nd ed. Omni-press. OR.
1999.

Peters, EM, Anderson, R, Nieman, DC, et al. Vitamin C
supplementation attenuates the increases in circulating cortisol,
adrenaline and anti-inflammatory polypeptides following
ultramarathon running. Int J Sports Med. 2001; 22(7): 537-543.

Rothenberg, R, Hart K. Hormone Optimization in
Preventative/Regenerative Medicine. Panda Press. CA.

Tilgner, S. Herbal Medicine From the Heart of the Earth. OR. Wise
Acres Press. 1999.

Tsigos, C, Chrouos, GP. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis,
neuroendocrine factors and stress. Journal of Psychosomatic Research.
2002; 53(4): 865-871
Tsigos, C, Chrouos, GP. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis,
neuroendocrine factors and stress. Journal of Psychosomatic Research.
2002; 53(4): 865-871

Wilson, J. Adrenal Fatigue the 21st Century Stress Syndrome. CA.
Smart Publications. 2001.

Natural Solutions for Testosterone
Deficiency

Bernini, GP, et al. Influence of endogenous androgens on carotid
wall in postmenopausal women. Menopause: 2001; 8(1): 43-50.

Bone, K. The Ultimate Herbal Compendium. Australia. Phytotherapy
Press. 2007.

Buchanan, JR, et al. Effect of excess endogenous androgens on bone
density in young women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998; 67(5): 937.

Davis, S.R. The clinical use of androgens in female sexual disorders.
J Sex Marital Ther. 1998; 24(3): 153-156.

El-Tantawy, WH, Temraz A, El-Gindi, OD. Free serum testosterone
level in male rats treated with Tribulus alatus extracts. Int Braz J
Urol. 2007; 33(4).

Fahim, MS, et al. Effect of Panax Ginseng on Testosterone Level and
Prostate in Male Rats. Systems Biology in Reproductive Medicine.
1982; 8(4): 261-263

Guay, AT, Decreased testosterone in regularly menstruation women
with decreased libido: a clinical observation. J Sex Marital Ther.
2001; 27(5): 513-519.

Holick, MF. Sunlight and vitamin D for bone health and prevention
of autoimmune diseases, cancers, and cardiovascular disease. Am J
Clin Nutr. December 2004; 80(6)

Hudson, Tori. Women’s Encyclopedia of Natural Medicine. NY.
McGraw Hill. 2008.

Kenny, AM, et al. Effects of transdermal testosterone on bone and
muscle in older men with low bioavailable testosterone levels. J
Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2001; 56(5): 266-272.

Kraemer, WJ, et al. Effects of heavy-resistance training on hormonal
response patterns in younger vs. older men. Journal of Applied
Physiology. 1999; 87(3): 982-992.

Marz, R. Medical Nutrition From Marz. 2nd ed. Omni-press. OR.
1999.

Rothenberg, R, Hart, K. Hormone Optimization in
Preventative/Regenerative Medicine. Panda Press. CA.

Salvati G, Genovesi G, Marcellin L, Paolini P, De Nuccio I, Pepe M,
Re M. Effects of Panax Ginseng C.A. Meyer saponins on male
fertility. Panminerva Med. 1996; 38(4):249-54.

Sinclair, S. Male infertility: nutritional and environmental
considerations. Altern Med Rev. 2000; 5(1): 28-38.

Snyder, PJ, et al. Effects of testosterone replacement in hypogonadal
men. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000: 85(8): 2670-2677.

Tilgner, S. Herbal Medicine From the Heart of the Earth. OR. Wise
Acres Press. 1999.

Volek JS, Kraemer WJ, Bush JA, Incledon, T, Boetes, M.
Testosterone and cortisol in relationship to dietary nutrients and
resistance exercise. Journal of Applied Physiology. 1997; 82(1): 49-54.

Wang, C, et al. Transdermal testosterone gel improves sexual
function, mood, muscle strength, and body composition parameters
in hypogonadal men. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000; 85(8): 2839-
2853.

Wilson, J. Adrenal Fatigue the 21st Century Stress Syndrome. CA.
Smart Publications. 2001.

Hormone Replacement Therapy

Arlt, W, et al. Dehydroepiandrosterone replacement in women with
adrenal insufficiency pharmacokinetics, bioconversion and clinical
effects on well-being, sexuality and cognition. Endocr Res. 2000;
26(4): 505-511.

Bernini, GP, et al. Influence of endogenous androgens on carotid
wall in postmenopausal women. Menopause: 2001; 8(1): 43-50.

Buchanan, JR, et al. Effect of excess endogenous androgens on bone
density in young women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998; 67(5): 937.

Canonico M, Plu-Bureau G, Lowe G, Scarabin PY. Hormone
replacement therapy and risk of venous thromboembolism in
postmenopausal women: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ.
2008; 336:1227

Cleare, AJ, et al. Hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis dysfunction in
chronic fatigue syndrome, and the effects of low dose
hydrocortisone therapy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001; 86(8): 3545-
3554.

Cleghorn, RA. Adrenal cortisol insufficiency: psychological and
neurological observations. Canad Med Ass J. 1951; 65: 449.

Davis, S.R. The clinical use of androgens in female sexual disorders.
J Sex Marital Ther. 1998; 24(3): 153-156.

De Lignieres, B, et al. Differential effects of exogenous estradiol and
progesterone on mood in postmenopausal women: individual
dose/effect relationship. Maturitas. 1982; 4: 67-72.

Deutsch, S, et al. The correlation of serum estrogens and androgens
with bone density in late postmenopause. Int J Gynaecol Obstet.
1987; 25(3): 217-222.

Feldman, HA, et al. Low dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate and heart
disease in middle-aged men: cross sectional results from
Massachusetts Male Aging Study. Ann Epidemiol: 2001; 153(1): 79-
89.

Fingerova, H, et al. Reduced serum dehydroepiandrosterone levels
in postmenopausal osteoporosis. Ceska Gynekol. 1998; 63(2): 110-
113.

Gerhard, M, et al. Estradiol therapy combined with progesterone
and endothelium-dependent vasodilation in post-menopausal
women. Circulation: 1998; 98(12): 1158-1163.

Guay, AT, Decreased testosterone in regularly menstruation women
with decreased libido: a clinical observation. J Sex Marital Ther.
2001; 27(5): 513-519.

Hanke, H, et al. Estradiol concentrations in premenopausal women
with coronary heart disease. Coron Artery Dis. 1997; 8(8): 511-515.

Hargrove, JT, Osteen, KG. An Alternative Method of Hormone
Replacement Therapy Using The Natural Sex Steroids. Infer & Repr.
Clinics N. Am. 1995; 6(4): 654-660.

Holtorf, K. The Bioidentical Hormone Debate: Are Bioidentical
Hormones (Estradiol, Estriol, and Progesterone) Safer or More
Efficacious than Commonly Used Synthetic Versions in Hormone
Replacement Therapy? Postgraduate Medicine. 2009; 121(1).

Hudson, Tori. Women’s Encyclopedia of Natural Medicine. NY.
McGraw Hill. 2008.

Jefferies, W. Safe Uses of Cortisone. IL. Thomas, 1981.

Kenny, AM, et al. Effects of transdermal testosterone on bone and
muscle in older men with low bioavailable testosterone levels. J
Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2001; 56(5)266-272.

Labrie, F, et al. Effect of 12 moth dehydroepiandrosterone
replacement therapy on bone, vagina and endometrium in
postmenopausal women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1997; 82(10):
3498-3505.

Lemon, HM. Estriol Prevention of Mammary Carcinoma induced by
7,12-dimethylbenzanthracene procarbazine. Cancer Research. 1975:
1341-1353.


Negata, C, et al. Association of dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate with
serum HDL cholesterol concentrations in post-menopausal Japanese
women. Maturitas. 1998; 31(1): 21-27.

Physicians’ Desk Reference. NJ. Medical Economics Data; 1993:
856-857

Richards, DH. A post hysterectomy syndrome. Lancet. Oct 26, 1974:
983-984.

Rothenberg, R, Hart, K. Hormone Optimization in
Preventative/Regenerative Medicine. Panda Press. CA.

Smith, YR, et al. Long term estrogen replacement is associated with
improved nonverbal memory and attentional measures in
postmenopausal women. Fertil Steril. 2001; 76(6): 1101-1107.

Tremollieres, FA, et al. Effect of Hormone Replacement therapy on
age-related increase in carotid artery intima-media thickness in
postmenopausal women. Atherosclerosis: 2000; 153(1): 81-88.

Walsh, BA, et al. 17beta-estradiol reduces tumor necrosis factor
alpha-mediated LDL accumulation in the artery wall. J Lipid Res.
1999: 40(3): 387-96.

Wang, C, et al. Transdermal testosterone gel improves sexual
function, mood, muscle strength, and body composition parameters
in hypogonadal men. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000; 85(8): 2839-
2853.

Wilson, J. Adrenal Fatigue the 21st Century Stress Syndrome. CA.
Smart Publications. 2001.

‘This file was downloaded from ZLibrary project

zlibrary

Your gateway to knowledge and culture. Accessible for everyone.

zibraryse  singleloginre go-to-zlibraryse  single-loginru

Official Telegram channel

Z-Access

wiki/Z-Libray


